Integrated Pest Management (IPM) is (ETL) and Economic Injury Level (EIL) a component of the agroecosystem are to be followed as index for initiating management technology for sustainable economically viable control measures. crop production. It isa knowledge intensive ETL for some vegetable crops is given in system and background information Annexure VI. Need based control strategy regarding the pest, abiotic and biotic factors, not only helps in reducing the pesticide agroecosystem and management tactics consumption and environmental abuse, required for execution of IPM programmes. but also helps in maintaining minimum List indicating fungal diseases, Bacterial pest population for survival of natural diseases, viral and phytoplasmal diseases enemies. Insecticides of plant origin, growth in vegetable crops are given in Annexure |, regulators,attractants/repellants, bioagents, Annexure Il and Annexure Ill, respectively. biopesticides, entomopathogenic bacteria, Similarly, details of Fungicides/Insecticides fungi and Nuclear Polyhedrosis Virus (NPV), and Biopesticides, Phermones used in besides pheromone traps, sticky traps, and IPM of vegetables are given in Annexure _ trap crops can fit well in the IPM. Botanicals, IV, and Annexure V, respectively. The First being non-persistent and safe to mammals, and foremost tool in IPM programme is to possess good promise in pest management. determine the level of pest population, A list of Pesticides/Pesticide Formulations which is going to cause economic damage. which are banned in India is given in In this context, Economic Threshold Level Annexure VII.



» MANAGEMENT Eggs hatch in about 3-4 days and the first instars Fruit Borer (Helicoverpa armigera Hubner) larvae initially feed on the leaves and migrate to the The adult is stout and medium-sized moth and has_ developing green fruit later. The larvae bore into the a dark circular spot in the centre on the forewing. fruits with the posterior end outside the hole. Full- They lay small, single, and whitish round eggs on the grown caterpillars show characteristic whitish and trifoliate leaves beneath the topmost flower cluster. dark brown longitudinal stripes. Borer damaged fruits ae —- NPV infected larva M of tomato

Management « Apply neem cake to furrows (open)/beds Under Open Conditions: (polyhouse) @ 250 kg/ha at planting and repeat «Effective management can be done by adopting after 25 days. marigold as trap crop. * Spray neem seed powder extract 4% or neem soap * Giving sprays of Ha NPV @ 250 LE /ha at 28,35 and 1% at 15-20 DAPS. 42 days after transplanting. * Inopen conditions, if the incidence is high, remove ¢ Mechanical collection and destruction of bored infected leaves and spray Triazophos 40 EC (1ml) fruit at periodic intervals (3-4 times) brings down mixed with 7.5 g neem/I. the borer incidence to less than 2 per cent. *« Under protected conditions avoid frequent spraying of synthetic pesticides. At the most, one spray of Deltamethrin 2.8 EC @ 1ml/I or * Spray Ha NPV at 250 LE/ha + 1% jaggery along Cypermethrin 25 EC @ 0.5 ml/I or Triazophos 40 EC with sticker (0.5 ml/litre) during evenings when @ 2ml/I may be given, if required. the larvae are young. ¢ For grown up larvae spay Indoxacarb 14.5 SC @ 0.5 ml/l or Thiodicarb 75 WP @ 1g/I. Under Protected Conditions: Whiteflies (Bemicia tabacii) Whitefly is a well-known vector, which transmits tomato leaf curl virus. It has piercing and sucking mouthpart and both nymphs and adults feed on lower surface of the leaves causing deformation of young leaves. Whiteflies also excrete honeydew, causing sooty mold. Under protected conditions whiteflies become more persistent, which require extensive management hatch out of these eggs and start mining the leaves _ practices as mentioned below. Serpentine Leaf Miner (Liromyza trifolii Burgess) The tiny, metallic fly punctures the leaf lamina and feeds on the oozing sap. It lays eggs on the outer margin of leaves. Within 2-3 days, whitish maggots and pupate in 6-10 days. Pupation takes place in the soil and occasionally on the leaf surface itself, Management Typical serpentine shaped tunnels are formed in the * Use virus resistant hybrids. leaf lamina indicating the path of feeding by the * Raise nurseries in seedling trays under nylon nets or polyhouses. * Spray Imidacloprid 200 SL (0.3ml/l)_ or Thiomethoxam 25 WP (0.3 g/l) in nursery at 15 days after sowing. * Remove the leaf curl infested plants as soon as disease symptoms are expressed. This helps in reducing source of inoculums of the disease. * Drench the base of the seedlings with Imidacloprid 200 SL (0.03ml/I) or Thiomethoxam 25 WP (0.3 g/l) before transplanting. If protreys are used for raising nursery, drench the protreys with the chemicals maggots. Leaf miner damage on tomato leaves one day before transplanting. « After transplanting give need-based sprays of Management Imidacloprid 20 SL (0.3ml/l) or Thiomethoxam «Often the incidence starts from nursery itself. 25 WP (0.3 g/l) at 15 days after planting and do Hence, remove infected leaves at the time of not repeat after fruiting stage as this may leave planting or within a week of transplanting. harmful residues in fruits. 

«Install yellow sticky traps coated with adhesive leaves and lower leaf surface thoroughly as mites or sticky glue at crop canopy level for monitoring are generally observed there. adult whitefly population. ¢ As an alternative to the chemical acaricides spray «If the traps indicate the whitefly activity, spray neem oil/neem soap/ pongamia soap 1%. Dimethoate 30EC @ 2ml/I or neem seed kernel + Under polyhouse conditions spray need-based extract 4% (NSKE) or pongamia or neem oil application of acaricides like Abamectin 1.9 EC @ (8-10 ml/l) or neem soap (1049/1). 0.5 ml/I or Dicofol 18.5 EC @ 2.5 ml/I or Fenazaquin «Rogue out the virus affected plants as soon as the 10 EC @ 1 m/l in rotation with plant products like symptoms are observed. pongamia oil or neem oil (8-10 ml/I) or neem soap (10 g/l). Tobacco Caterpillar (Spodoptera lituara) « When incidence is severe, remove and destroy This is a minor pest under open conditions and all severely infected leaves followed by a spray of assumes severe form under protected cultivation mixture of an acaricide with botanicals mentioned particularly in ill managed playhouses. Eggs are laid above. in clusters on foliage. Young larvae feed gregariously on leaves. Mature larvae, migrate and cause extensive Root-knot Nematodes (Meloidogyne damage to leaves and fruits. They hide in soil and crop incognita, M. javanica) debris during the day time. Root-knot nematodes cause root galls on the feeder roots and sometimes affect the entire root system showing heavy galling. This affects the uptake of nutrition and water and the plants show wilting during warmer part of the day. This causes stunted plants with yellow foliage resulting in yield reduction. Management “Collection and destruction of egg masses and gregarious larvae. * Spray Spodoptera NPV 250 LE/ha + 1% jaggery along with sticker (0.5 ml/litre) during evenings. «Use poison baiting. Mix 10 kg of rice bran or Management wheat bran with 2 kg jaggery by adding a little *« Use nematode resistant variety/hybrid if water in the morning. In the evening add 250 available. gm of Methomyl or Thiodicarb formulation and *« Follow crop rotation with marigold, wherever sprinkle over the bed. Caterpillars get attracted to possible fermenting jaggery, feed and get killed. * Seed treatment with bio-pesticides- Pseudomonas fluorescens @ 10g/kg seed. Red Spider Mites (Tetranychus urticae) «Nursery bed treatment with T. harzianum @ 50 g/ Red spider mites thrive under high temperature, sq.m. dry weather and are more serious under protected .. For the management of nematodes in the main conditions. They are generally found on the lower field apply 2 tons of farmyard manure enriched surface of older leaves. However, when the infestation with T. harzianum and Paecilomyces lilacinus per is very high they attack all parts of the plant and are acre before planting, along with 100-200 kg of observed in colonies covered by white-silky webs. neem or pongamia cake. Adults and nymphs lacerate the leaves causing . Apply Carbofuran 3G @ 1 kg ai/ha at transplanting. yellowing and discoloration. Under polyhouses the following pest management Management practices depicted as a flow chart may be followed. * Remove and destroy the affected leaves. ¢ Under open conditions, spray Dicofol 18.5 EC @ 2.5 ml or wettable sulphur 80 WP @ 3g/I. Spray lower

IPM package in tomato under polyhouse Raise seedlings in protreys in polyhouse 15 DAS Spray the plants with Imidacloprid or Thiomethoam. (Days after seed sowing) Vv One day before transplanting Drench the base of seedlings with Imidacloprid or VW Thiomethoxam At transplanting Apply neem cake 250 kg/ha. Vv 15 DAP (days after planting) Spray the seedlings with Imidacloprid or Thiomethoxam Vv 25 DAP (days after planting) Apply neem cake 250 kg/ha Vv Post flowering and fruiting stage Monitor for pest like fruit borer, tobacco caterpillar, leaf miner, whitefly and red spider mite. Erect yellow sticky traps to monitor whitefly. Spray NPV according to the pest. Remove leaves severely infected with leaf miner/red spider mite Spray neem seed powder/neem soap for leaf miner. Spray synthetic acaricide/botanical in rotation to control red spider mite, spray systemic insecticide/botanical to control whitefly. BRINJAL adult moths lay tiny white eggs singly on flower buds and other plant parts. Eggs hatch into small light brown larvae. Caterpillars feed inside the tender shoots before flowering and cause wilting of the affected shoots. Later, the larvae bore into flowers; flower Shoot and Fruit Borer (Leucinode orbonalis Guen) This pest has developed resistance against all groups of insecticides and management is very difficult. The Larva inside the stem larvae bore into fruit 6 | 

bud and the grown up larvae migrate and bore fruit Management contaminating them with excreta. When the incidence * Soil application of neem cake 250 kg/ha followed is high, unopened flower buds swell and harbour the by sprays of NSPE 4% or neem soap 1% at 10 days borer. Just before pupation, the grown up larvae come interval. out of the fruits and flower buds to pupate in silky = Spray of systemic insecticides like Dimethoate cocoons on plant parts or debris. 30 EC @ 2ml/| or Imidacloprid 200 SL @ 0.3ml/I or Acephate 75 SP (1 g/l) at pre-flowering stage. Management * Use nylon net barrier for raising nurseries to Ash Weevil (Myllocerus subfasciatus eliminate pest incidence coming from nursery to Guerin) main field. * Cut and destroy wilted insect damaged shoot tips during pre-flowering and flowering period at weekly intervals. * Regularly destruction of larvae in swollen damaged flower buds and fruits after each harvest is compulsory. “Grow all round barrier crops like maize. * Practice clean cultivation. Ash weevil is an endemic pest feed on the foliage and cause saw teeth like damage along the leaf margin. The adults lay eggs in and around base of the plants in soil and the hatching grubs feed on roots. Affected plants wilt and dry up. Wilting is first noticed in patches in a plot. One can notice very few roots in such wilting plants when uprooted. Both the roots and plant base show scraped damage. Grubs pupate in the soil encrustation. Pheromone Trap Use of water traps loaded with pheromone @ 30 /Acre can reduce the pest incidence to minimum level. Botanical and Bioagents «Apply neem or pongamia cake @ 250-500 kg/ha to ridges at flowering and repeat 2 more times at 30-45 days interval. «Spray NSPE 4% or neem oil 2% at 10 days interval. Mix Cypermethrin 25 EC (0.75 ml/l) with neem soap @ 7.5g/| and spray. Management * Spray Bacillus thuringiensis formulation (1%) Soil application of neem cake at the time of at weekly interval followed by release of transplanting (@ 250 kg/ha) and repeat the neem Trichogramma chilonis @ 2,50,000 /ha (50,000 / cake application for 1 or 2 times at 30 and 60 DAP. release -5 times at weekly intervals, starting from flowering). Epilachna Beetle (Epilachna vigintioctopunctata, Fab.) Leafhopper (Amrasca biguttula Both the grubs and the adult beetles scrape the leaves biguttula |shida) in semi-circular or half moon shaped fashion. Females Both adults and nymphs suck the sap from leaves. The lay torpedo shaped, 15-50 yellowish eggs on the eggs are inserted into the midrib or veins. On hatching ventral surface of leaves. Heavy infestation result in the nymphs move along the veins and nymphs suck _ leaf skeletonization. Pupation takes place on the plant the leaf sap. On the older leaves, the damage is seen _ itself. as yellowish-green mosaic patches followed by brown necrosis and curling along the leaf margin. 

Other Pests Gall midge (Asphondylia sp), stem borer (Euzophera perticella), leaf roller, (Eublemmaolivacea (Walker) ), lace wing bug, (Urentius echinus) and thrips, (Sericothrips solanifolii) also attack the crop. Management «Raise the nurseries with the nylon net barrier. «Most of these pest can be managed by application of neem cake @ 250 kg/ha and repeating the same treatment 2-3 times at 30 days interval for 2-3 times. aE Se Reniform Nematode (Rotylenchulus reniformis) The infected plants show yellowing and reduced size of the leaves and fruits and thus affecting the yield potential. Management * Collect and destroy adult beetles. “Spray any contact insecticide like Carbaryl 50 WP @ 3g/l or 40 EC @ 1.5 ml/I if required. Root-knot Nematodes (Meloidogyne incognita, M. javanica) The root-knot nematodes cause root galls on the leaves by scrapping the epidermis causing yellowing feeder roots which sometimes affect the entire root of leaves followed by foliage drying. Practices detailed system showing heavy galling. This affects the uptake under tomato can be adopted for its control. of nutrition and water and the plant show wilting during warmer part of the day. Later, stunting of plants with yellow foliage and reduction in yield is very common. Red Spider Mites (Tetranychus urticae Koch) Tiny mites feed mainly on the lower surface of the Red spider mites damage on brinjal Management * Spray of Dicofol 18.5 EC @ 2.5 ml or any other acaricide like wettable sulphur 75 WP @ 3 g/l. ¢« Asan alternative to the chemical acaricides, spray of neem soap/pongamia soap 1% on the under surface of the leaves. - Root-knot infected plant 8 | 

Management Management * Seed treatment with bio-pesticide-Pseudomonas + Apply neem cake @ 250 kg/ha to plant beds while fluorescens @ 10 g/kg seed. planting and repeat after 30 days. «Nursery bed treatment with T. harzianum @ 50 g/ « Spray Acephate 75 SP@ 1.0q/I or Fipronil 5 SC @ sq.m. 1ml/l or ethofenprox 10 EC @ 1ml/I in rotation. «Apply 2 tons of farmyard manure enriched with « Spray Acephate 75 SP (0.5 gm) + pongamia oil (2ml) Tharzianum and Paecilomyces lilacinus per acre +1 ml sticker in one litre water after emulsifying before planting, along with 100-200 kg of neem or (shaking thoroughly in a bottle). pongamia cake. « Apply Carbofuran 1G @ 1kg ai/ha at transplanting. White or Yellow Mites (Polyphagotarsonemus latus) CHILLI AND CAPSICUM These are very minute mites and cannot be seen Thrips (Scirtothrips dorsalis) by naked eyes. Damage is more in hot and humid Thrips are minute insects with fringed wings, serious Conditions. Adults and nymphs scrape terminal during dry periods of high temperature. Both adult eaves and auxiliary shoots. As a result, leaves become and nymphs suck the sap from young developing @rrow, twisted with elongated petiole. The damage leaves. Affected leaves curl upwards along the margin! characterized by downward curling of leaves and and get crinkled and reduced in size. They also feed Stunted growth of plants and dropping of flowers. on floral parts and fruits. Fruit damage result in rough brown patches affecting their quality and drastically reducing the market value. Fruit discolouration Yellow mite damage on capsicum Management « Apply wettable sulphur 80 WP @ 3g/I or any acaricide (directing the spray on the ventral surface of leaves). “Spray pongamia oil (2ml/I) mixed with acaricides. “Spray neem seed powder extract 4% at 10 days interval when the pest incidence is low. As and when the pest incidence increases, spray with synthetic acaricides like Dicofol 18.5 EC @ 2.5ml/I and repeat the spray after 10 days, if required. ¢ Under protected conditions spary acaricides like Abamectin 1.9 EC @ 0.5ml/I or Dicofol 18.5 EC @ 2.5 ml/l or Fenazaquin 10 EC@ 1ml/I in rotation with plant products like pongamia oil or neem oil (8-10 ml/l) or neem soap (10g/l) when the leaves start curling down with all the precautions. Thrips damage on capsicum fruits 

Aphids (Aphis gossypi and Management Myzus persicae) * Spray specific NPV of the borer species. These are small green insects and suck the sap from * !nundative release of Trichogramma sp. tender leaves and flower buds. Excretion of honeydew “ Use marigold as trap crop (one row of marigold for by aphids promotes sooty mould growth, thereby every 18 rows of chilli) for managing H. armigera. reducing photosynthesis and fruit quality. Aphids also |“ Collect and destroy eggs masses and immature act as vectors for transmitting mosaic virus disease. larvae of S. /itura. * Use poison baiting (10 kg rice flour + 1kg of jaggery Management + 250 g of Methomyl 40 SP) for S. /itura and repeat “Spray Acephate 75 SP @ 1g/l or Dimethoate 30 EC the baiting 2-3 times if necessary. @ 2 mI/in rotation when required. «For S. exigua, spray Indoxacarb 14.5 SC @ 0.75 ml/I or ¢ Remove all the virus affected plants and destroy. Spinosad @ 0.75 ml/I or Thiodicarb 75 WP@ 0.75 g/l. * Sometimes tomato fruit borer and tobacco Borers caterpillar may also attack capsicum under Tobacco caterpillar, Spodoptera litura and tomato fruit polyhouse. Follow the management practices borer, H. armigera are also serious pest in chilli and given under tomato. capsicum. These affect the market value of the chilli crop to a great extent, if proper care is not taken. Root-knot Nematodes (Meloidogyne incognita) Root-knot nematodes cause root galls on the feeder roots which sometimes affect the entire root system showing heavy galling. This affects the uptake of nutrition and water and the plants also show wilting during warmer part of the day. Later, stunting of plants with yellow foliage and reduction in yield is very common. Management “Management practices given under tomato and brinjal are also effective on chillies. IPM package in capsicum under polyhouse Raise seedlings in protreys in polyhouse At transplanting Apply neem cake 250 kg/ha. VW 15 DAP Spray Acephate for thrips Vv 30 DAP Apply neem cake 250 kg/ha VW Post flowering and fruiting stage monitor for pest like fruit borer, tobacco caterpillar, thrips and yellow mite. Spray NPV according to the pest. Spray Acephate / Fipronil / Ethofenprox / Acephate + pongamia oil in rotation for thrips control. Post flowering and fruiting stage Spray synthetic acaricide / botanical in rotation to control yellow mite. 

OKRA Management Leafhoppers (Amrasca biguttula biguttula) «Collect and destroy the affected fruits and stems. «Apply neem cake @ 250 kg/ha after germination and repeat two more times at 30 days interval and spray neem soap 1% or NSPE 4%. Spray at 10 days interval. «During rainy season, spray effective contact insecticides like Indoxacarb 14.5 SC @ 0.75 ml/I. A waiting period of minimum one week to be maintained. * Avoid staggered planting. Hoppers lay pear shaped, elongated and yellowish white eggs in the veins on the under surface of leaves. Both the adults and nymphs suck the cell sap. Nymphs move diagonally when disturbed. There are 10 to 12 overlapping generations in a year. Plants loose their vitality and affected leaves turn yellow and curl upwards. When the infestation is high during summer, leaves turn brick red and show large necrotic spots, which is often confused with fungal infection. Management Aphids (Aphis gossypii) « Apply neem cake @ 250 Kg/ha to soil immediately This js a polyphagous pest, feeding in colonies and after germination and repeat after 30 days. completely covers the shoot tips, buds and lower * In the initial stages of crop before flowering spray surface of leaves. Both nymphs and adults suck the systemic insecticide like Acephate 75 SP (Iml/I) sap. They also excrete honeydew on which sooty or Imidacloprid (0.3 ml/I). Once the fruit harvest mould develops. starts avoid systemic insecticides. *« Spray neem or pongamia soaps @ 0.5% or pulverized neem seed powder extract (NSPE) 4% at the lower surface of the leaves. Management “Clip and destroy infested shoots * Thoroughly spray neem or pongamia soap (1%) or pulverized neem seed powder extract (NSPE) 4%. During pre-flowering period spray systemic insecticides like Dimethoate 30 EC (2ml/l) or Acephate 75 SP or Acetamiprid. Shoot and fruit borer (Earias vittella and E. insulana) Spotted bollworms are active throughout the year reaching peaks during March-May and August- October. Female lays green coloured eggs with ; longitudinal ridges on buds, flowers and fruits. Like Petiole Maggot (Melanagromyza brinjal shoot and fruit borer, the infestation is seen on //bisci Spencer) shoots before and after flowering, feed exclusively on This is a dipteran fly and attacks the crop throughout fruits. Infested shoots wither and wilt. the growth period. Generally drying of leaves is noticed. If petioles of such leaves are opened, yellow maggot and pupae can be noticed. Pest attacks immediately after germination and may cause mortality, or cracking of main stem. Management «Apply neem cake @ 250 kg/ha immediately after germination and repeat after 30 days followed by sprays of NSPE 4% or neem soap 1% at 10 days interval after flowering. Fruit borer damage on okra

Whitefly (Bemesia tabaci) «Apply 2 tons of farmyard manure enriched with Pochonia_ chlamydosporia and _ Paecilomyces lilacinus per acre before sowing, along with 100- 200 kg of neem or pongamia cake. «In case of severe incidence, apply Carbofuran 1.5 kg ai/ha. It is a polyphagous vector transmitting yellow vein mosaic disease (YVM). It lays eggs on the lower surface of leaves. Both the adult and the nymph feed by sucking leaf sap. They excrete honeydew, which results in sooty mould. At present many varieties and hybrids resistant to YVM are available in market and hence, disease management is very easy. CRUCI FEROUS VEG ETABLES Management (Cabbage, Cauliflower, etc.) “Grow YVM resistant varieties/hybrids * Apply neem cake @ 250 kg/ha at germination and =Djamond Back Moths (DBM) again at 30 DAP followed by sprays of pulverized (Plutella xylostella L.) neem seed powder extract 4% or neem oil 1%. * Spray Imidacloprid 200 SL @ 0.3ml/l or Thiomethoxam 0.3 gm/I (should not be sprayed after flowering stage) Diamond back moths are small grayish brown insects bearing whitish triangular spots on posterior margins of the forewings and while resting the wings come together and form a diamond pattern. This is a major pest of cruciferous crops, particularly cabbage and cauliflower during January-June and also during dry periods in monsoon. Eggs are yellowish white, and are laid singly on tender leaves. A single female may lay about 40-60 eggs. Incubation period is 3-6 days. The first instar larvae mine the epidermal surface of the leaves. Second instars onwards the larvae feed externally by making holes in the leaves. Pupation Mites (Tetranychus cinnobarinus, Oligonychus coffeae) The infestation of mites is mostly observed during the warm and dry periods of the season. Nymphs and adults lacerate the leaves resulting in whitish grey patches and affected leaves become mottled, turn brown and fall. Management occurs inside silken cocoon on the plants, which last * Spray Dicofol 18.5EC @ 2.5 mloranyotheracaricide for 4-6 days. The complete life cycle from egg to egg like wettable sulphur 50 WP @ 3g/I. takes place in about 20-25 days. *« As an alternative to synthetic acaricides, spray Ae ah neem soap/pongamia soap 1%. * Thoroughly spray on the under surface of the leaves for good control. Root-knot Nematodes (Meloidogyne incognita, M. javanica) The root-knot nematodes typically cause root galls on the feeder roots, affecting the uptake of nutrition and water. The above ground symptoms are, stunting of the plant with yellow foliage often mistaken for nutrient deficiency symptoms. The reduction in size of fruits is often accompanied by fresh flower drop. Management Cat i: * Seed treatment with bio-pesticide Pseudomonas Faas. Meas 3 ee Mustard’as.a trap crop in cauliflower and cabbages fluorescens @ 10g/kg seed. 

Management Management ¢ Sow Indian mustard as a trap crop. * Collect and destroy egg masses and gregarious * Spray neem seed powder extract @ 4% or neem larvae. soap 1% or pongamia soap 1% thoroughly + Spray any contact insecticide on the foliage when coverage to the crop canopy. the larvae are observed. «Install light traps (3-4 with 60 or 100 Watt bulbs / Spray neem seed kernel extract 4% or pulverized acre) to control adults. For one acre plot use 3-4 neem seed powder extract (NSPE) 4%. light traps (60 or 100 Watt bulbs) by hanging above a bucket half filled with water. Alternatively, Stem Borer (Hellula undalis Zeller) hang the bulb above a gunny bag (slating below) The adult moths lays eggs singly on leaves, the hatched smeared with grease or oil. Illuminate the bulbs for arvae mine the leaves along side veins. The grown full night. Adults of DBM will get attracted to light up larvae bore into stems preventing head initiation, and get trapped in the water/oil. Use the light traps — which results in multiple shoots and multiple head for 3-4 days for effective control of DBM adults. formation. « Asthis pest has developed resistance against many insecticides, use of effective insecticide currently Management available in market is essential. * Spray the seedlings with an effective contact * Followthe detailed IPM package as given at the end insecticide before planting followed by one more of the section of pests of cruciferous vegetables. spray at 10 DAP, particulary for summer and kharif ¢ The adults migrating from neighbouring plots are crop (March-July). to be controlled by using light traps spraying an + Spray pulverized Neem Seed Powder Extract affective insecticide. (NSPE) 4%. Leaf Webbers (Crocidolomia binotalis Zeller) Aphids (Brevicoryne brassicaeLinn, The moths lays eggs in clusters of 40-100 on leaf Myzus persicae Sulzer ) surface, which hatch in 5-7 days. Young larvae feed Aphids suck the sap, devitalize the plants affecting gregariously and later web the leaves together and the quality of head or curds and become severe when feed within. This results in rotting of cabbage head contract insecticides are sprayed regularly. Direct and cauliflower curds. The larval period lasts for 25-20 feeding on young growth leads to wilting of plants. days while pupation occurs in soil, which varies from Early attack may lead to stunted growth. Symptoms 15-40 days. of viruses transmitted by B. brassicae include mosaic, ea wea chlorotic and necrotic lesion on leaves. M. persicae is the most important aphid virus vector. Myzus persicae Brevicoryne brassicae . Le Leaf webber damage on cabbage

Management due to poison baiting. Repeat the baiting 2-3 days * Spray any systemic insecticide like Dimethoate 3 for total control. EC @ 2ml/| when the aphids are observed. Spray pulverized neem seed powder extract Other Minor Pests (NSPE) 4%. Gram caterpillar, Helicoverpa armigera (Hubner), « Follow mustard trap crop IPM as mustard will Mustard saw fly Athalia lugens proxima (Klug) are some attract all aphids after flowering and main crop of the minor pests of cruciferous vegetables which will be spared of the pest incidence. feed on the foliage deteriorating the market quality of heads and curds. MINOR PEST Tobacco Caterpillar (Spodoptera lituara Fab.) The moths lay eggs in groups and young larvae upto Management ¢ Mechanical control is very effective for gram caterpillar as the grown up caterpillars hide inside the hole and insecticide spray is not useful. third instar feed gregariously and skeletonises the ,, Spray Chlorpyriphos 20 EC @ 2.5 ml/I for mustard leaves. Grown up larvae completely devour the leaves and other plant parts in case of severe incidence. During high incidence, attain cutworm status, hide during daytime, come out during night and devastate LEGUMINOUS VEGETABLES the crop. Pod Borers A complex of pod borers viz., Lampides boeticus L., Maruca testulalis Geyer, Adisura atkinsoni (Lethierry), L. boeticus, Helicoverpa armigera affects the leguminous crops by feeding floral parts and pods resulting in reducing their marketable quality. saw fly. Lycaenid Borer (Lampides boeticus L.) This is a butterfly pest and commonly known as pea blue. The eggs are laid singly in flowers and flowers buds. In peas, the larvae bore into young pods. The entry hole gets blocked after sometime. However, in Tobacco caterpillar damage on cabbage head lablab, the larvae bore into flower buds. The pest can be monitored by the presence of the bored holes. Management When the larvae attains fourth instars, they migrate * Collect and destroy egg masses and gregarious and cause extensive damage to flower buds and pods. feeding larvae. Hence, control measures need attention in the early « Scouting regularly helps to locate egg masses and __ stages of pest incidence. skelietonised leaves. “Poison baiting (10 kg rice/wheat flour + 1 kg of Management jaggery + 500 g of Methomyl formulation per * !n peas, spray at flowering as soon as eggs are acre)- Mix the flour with jaggery, leave for 6-8 hrs, noticed with Cypermethrin 25 EC@ 2.5 ml/I or in the morning. In the evening add insecticide Indoxacarb 14.5 SC @ 0.5 ml/I. and mix carefully by wearing gloves with a stick. * In lablab, spray at flower bud stage, when on Sprinkle the mixture in furrows. The fermenting an average about 1 flower bud is damaged per jaggery attracts the caterpillars and will be killed inflorescence. 

Spotted Pod Borer (Maruca testulalis Geyer) Aphids (Aphis craccivora Koch & The pyralid moth lays eggs on small flower buds as Acrythosiphon pisum Harris) soon as flowering starts. Flower buds can be examined Bothnymphs and adults suck the sap from young plant for holes caused by young larvae. Control measures _ parts like shoot tips and inflorescence. A. craccivora is are to be followed at flower bud stage itself to prevent greenish black and A. pisum is greenish in colour. A. the larvae from developing and feeding on pods. pisum generally occurs on peas. Management «Apply neem cake 250 kg/ha at flowering and first spray at flower bud formation with pulverized neem seed powder extract (PNSPE) 4% or neem soap 1%. Repeat after one week. Damaged leaves and flowers “Spray Cypermethrin25EC@0.5ml/lorChlorpriphos 20 EC @ 2.5 ml/I or Indoxacarb 14.5SC @0.5 mI/l. Management * Clip infected shoots and spray neem soap or Field Bean Pod Borer (Adisura atkinsoni, pongamia soap @ 1%. Lethierry) * Spray Acephate 75 WP @ 0.75 m/I or Dimethoate This is the major pod borer in field bean and the larva 30 EC 2ml/I. resembles H. armigera. The eggs are laid on tender pods. The young larvae bore into these pods and Bugs develop inside and come out after attaining fourth any bugs are known to attack leguminous crops. instar, which is a migratory stage. Hence, control Of these, Nezara viridula and Coptosoma cribraria are measures at tender pod stage and again at flat pod often serious, mostly on cowpeas and lablab. Eggs are stage of the crop are essential. laid on tender plant parts. Nymphs and adults suck the sap from foliage, flower parts and pods and emit Management characteristic bad smell. « Applyneem cake 250 kg/ha at flowering and repeat after 20 days. Spray pulverized neem seed powder Management extract (NSPE) 4% of neem soap 1% at tender pod = Apply neem cake 250 kg per ha immediately after formation. Repeat sprays at 10 days intervals. germination and repeat at flowering. Spray neem * Spray Cypermethrin 25 EC @ 0.5 m/l or soap 1% or pulverized neem seed powder extract Chlorpyriphos 20 EC @ 2.5 ml/I or Indoxacarb 14.5 (NSPE) 4% at 10 days interval. SC @ 0.5 ml/I at peak egg laying period at tender Spray with Indoxacarb 0.5 ml/I if the incidence is pod stage and repeat after 15 days. high. Gram Pod Borer (Helicoverpa armigera Hubner) This polyphagous pest attacks peas occasionally along with L. boeticus. The habit of egg laying and larval feeding are the same as pea blue butterfly. Bean Fly (Ophiomyia phaseoli Tryon & O. centrocematis de Majore) Bean flies are the major pest attacking several legumes. While the first species attacks mostly beans and cowpeas, the second species attacks peas. Management P P P «As soon as eggs are noticed give the first spray at flowering with Indoxacarb 14.5 SC @ 0.5 ml/I or Novaluron 10 EC @ 0.75 ml/I. Bean Fly (O. phaseoli) This species is serious in French beans and peas but can also be noticed on dolichos beans. This pest is 

serious during dry periods of Kharif (June- August) and neem soap 1% or neem formulation with more after January-February when temperature increases than 10000 ppm Azadirachtin 2-3 ml/| at 20 and above 30°C and can cause more than 70% mortality 30 DAP. of the plants. The adults are small flies and lay eggs * Spray Acephate 0.75 ml/l or Dimethoate 30 EC @ in the unifoliate leaves that come immediately after 2ml per litre at 20 and 30 DAP. germination. It punctures the leaf, lays eggs under the leaf epidermis which turn into white spots, often Leafhoppers (Empoasca kerri Pruthi) confused with disease. These dried ovipositional The greenish yellow nymphs and adults suck the sap. cavities are observed within 2-3 days of germination During September-October after onset of north-east of seeds. The larvae mine the leaf lamina, veins, midrib, monsoon, the pest becomes very serious causing and petiole and enter the stem resulting in mortality. withering of the foliage and plants. The incidence is high during prolonged dry spells between rains, particularly in June-July months.When Management the incidence is early and high, plants invariably die. _|t can easily be controlled by any systemic insecticide This mortality is noticed only after 25-30 days, when or neem soap sprays as given under okra and brinjal. the plants are about to flower. Any control measures taken at that time is not useful. Management «Apply neem cake 250 kg/ha immediately after germination. Do not delay, particularly during kharif period. ¢ Monitor the plants for adult activities, puncture marks and petiole mining soon after germination. «As soon as a few adults are noticed hovering over the crop, spray Acephate 75 WP @ 0.75 g/l or PNSPE 4% or neem soap 1% or neem formulation with 10000 ppm Azadirachtin 2 ml/l. The botanicals get washed away by rain and become ineffective if it rains within 1-2 days of spray. * Give second spray after 12-20 days of sowing if 5 leaves show petiole mining symptoms per 10 leaves. Bean Fly (O. centrocematis) This species is specific to peas and lays eggs in the base of the stem resulting in drying of the leaves, from the base. Hence, the first symptom is drying of the first primitive leaf at the base, which occurs after about 20 days of sowing. Management «Apply neem cake 250 kg per hectare to the ridges 7 immediately after germination followed by sprays ase 5S of pulverized neem seed powder extract 4% or 

CUCURBITACEOUS Sometimes even the base of the plant gets attacked and plant start wilting. The incidence is more in wet VEGETABLES “imate Red Pumpkin Beetle (Aulacophora foveicollis Lucas & A. lewisii Baly) Management The adults are small, elongated yellow and defoliate << Use resistant varieties. the leaves immediately after germination. The larvae + Soil application of neem cake @ 250 kg/ha feed on roots and plant parts. immediately after germination and repeat at flowering followed by sprays of neem soap 1% or Management PNSPE 4% at 10 days interval after flowering. * Mechanically collect and destroy the pest if Crush pumpkin 1 kg and add 100 gm jaggery and incidence is low. 10 ml Malathion and keep in the plot (4-6 places * Ifthe pestincidenceis very severe, spray Indoxacarb per acre). Adults are attracted to the fermenting 14.5 SC @ 0.5 ml/I or Cabaryl 50 WP 4g/I or 25 EC @ pumpkin and lay eggs and get killed. Repeat the 2ml/I or Chlorpyriphos 20 EC2.5ml/I. process 2-3 times in the cropping season. * Erect cuelure (para pheromone trap) 3 per acre to Serpentine Leaf Miner (Liriomyza trifolii attract and trap male fruit flies. Burgess) ¢ Spray Carbaryl 50 WP @ 3 gm/I or Indoxacarb This is an introduced pest occurring on many cucurbit 0.5 ml/I. vegetables. Heavy incidence is noticed in watermelon, pumpkin, cucumber, etc. However, bitter gourd seems Red Spider Mite (Tetranychus to be resistant. A native larval parasitoid, Hemiptarsenus neocaledonicus Andre) vericornis is the major parasitoid on this pest. This pest is serious on cucurbits during warmer climate. Colonies of mites with in silk web can be observed on Management ventral leaf surface when incidence is high. ¢ Soil application of neem cake @ 250 kg/ha immediately after germination. Management * Destroy cotyledon leaves with leaf mining at 7 * Spray neem or pongamia soap at 1% on lower days after germination. surface thoroughly. * Spray PNSPE @ 4% or neem soap 1% or neem «+ Alternately, spray Dimethoate 30 EC @ 2ml/I or formulation with 10000 ppm or more (2ml/l) Ethion 50 EC @ 1ml/I or Wettable Sulphur 80 WP after 15 days sowing and repeat after 15 days, if @ 3g/l. necessary. «If the incidence is high first remove all severely Thrips (Thrips palmi Karny) infected leaves and destroy. Then mix neem soap Both nymphs and adults feed on the young shoot tips 5 gm and hostothion 1 ml/I and spray. After one and floral parts and is suspected vector of Tospo virus. week, spray neem soap 1% or PNSPE or neem They are serious during summer months. formulation with 10000 ppm or more (2ml/I). «Never spray the same insecticide repeatedly. Management * Soil application of neem cake (once immediately Fruit Fly (Bactocera cucurbitae Coquillett). after germination and again at flowering) followed This is the major pest of cucurbits. The damage by by NSPE @ 4% and neem soap 1% alternately at maggots results in rotting of young and ripened fruits 10-15 days interval. or drying and shriveling of fruits before maturity. 

“Spray any systemic insecticides like Acephate 75 direct damage to leaves and bulbs, aggravate fungal SP @ Ig/I or Dimethoate 30 EC @ 2ml/I. diseases and even vector virus. Leaf Eating Caterpillar (Dipahania (=Margaronia) indica Saund) Long shining caterpillars feed on leaves and fruits. & : i eS € , p Apply neem cake to soil immediately after germination. , ; | Spray any contact insecticides like Carbaryl 50 WP @ ‘be 3g/I. Neem or pongamia soap @ 0.75% also effectively Thrip damages onion a ae deep inside flowers manages this pest. * Soil application of neem cake (once immediately after germination and again at flowering) followed by NSPE @ 4% and neem soap 1% alternately at 10-15 days interval. * Spray Carbaryl 50 WP @ 3g/I or Indoxacarb 0.5 m/l. Thrip damage § Congregation : Damage of bulb leaves during bulb in of thrips Root-knot Nematodes (Meloidogyne : raglan EENeE development incognita) The root-knot nematodes cause root galls from the initial stages of the crop growth. The larvae feed on the roots, which show typical galls, and later the entire root system shows heavy galling. The foliage becomes light yellowish; the plants become stunted and results in flower and fruit drop. In spite of irrigation the plants appear sick and drooping during daytime. Management Monitoring: Sticky traps are commonly used for detecting thrips population. Various colours were found attracting different species of thrips in various geographical areas; widely used ones are yellow and bright blue traps. Cultural * Good crop management practices can be readily manipulated to the disadvantage of thrips. « Field sanitation techniques such as removing alternate weed host on bunds and destruction of culls of onion and garlic are helpful to some extent in bringing down thrips population. * Avoid successive planting of onion and garlic or other preferred host. Therefore, planting in upwind direction could be helpful in escaping infestation from old planting to some extent in the initial ONION AND GARLIC stages. Thrips (Thrips tabaci Lindeman) Thrips feed on a wide range of cultivated plants Planting Date and weeds. Some of the principal alternate hosts By making adjustments in transplanting dates, onions include cabbage, cotton, tomato, cucumber, melons, can be made tolerant to early thrips attack and pumpkins, strawberries and many flowering plants. satisfactory yields can be obtained with minimum Thrips are pestiferous in diverse ways. They cause chemical intervention. Management * Seed treatment with bio-pesticide Pseudomonas fluorescens @ 10g/kg seed. «Apply Carbofuran 3 G @ 1kg ai/ha at sowing and repeat after 45 days. *« Apply 2 tons of FYM enriched with Pochonia chlamydosporia and Paecilomyces lilacinus per acre before sowing, along with 100-200 kg of neem or pongamia cake. 

Mulching Chemical * Thrips being colour-sensitive, coloured mulches Many insecticides like dimethoate (0.06%) and Methyl may be employed for their control. Demeton (0.05%) are recommended for thrips control. «Reflective plastic silver colour and aluminium Cypermethrin at 60 g ai/ ha offers good control of this painted black mulches were effective in repelling pest. Carbosulfan (0.05%) and Lambda cyhalothrin the thrips in seed crop. also effectively suppress thrips population. ¢ The secret of thrips control in onion lies in the placement of the insecticide. It is necessary for the product to reach the base of the leaves where the majority of the thrips area is located. Unlike other crops, onion and garlic require higher pressure and spray volume for good coverage of foliage. Addition of a spreader or sticker (0.05-1.0%) is useful for retention and spread of spray fluid on erect leaves of onion. Avoid repeated use of the same insecticide to minimise development of Irrigation Sprinkler irrigation reduces thrips population considerably compared to drip and surface irrigation. Insects would be washed off or drowned in the water accumulated in the leaf bases. Due to continuous retention of moisture in the soil, the pupae get rotten. In case of garlic, sprinklers are not that effective as in case of onion mainly due to the closer inner leaf alignment that protects the thrips from splashes of water. insecticide resistance. Barriers * In seed crop, control of thrips is often difficult. The Two rows of maize or inner row of wheat and outer umbels will provide excellent hiding site and it is row of maize surrounding the onion plots. difficult to reach them with insecticide. * From the beginning, seed crop should be Biological Control monitored regularly for thrips and should be * These include lady beetles, minute pirate bugs, controlled well before flowers open. ground beetles, big-eyed bugs, lacewings, hover. Avoid sprays after flower opening. flies, predatory mites and spiders. So far limited |f necessary, safer insecticide should be used late success has been achieved in biological control of in the evening when no bees are foraging. T. tabaci in many parts of the world. «A predator, minute pirate bug, Orius tantillus and Maggot (Delia antique) anthocorid bug, found effectively feeding on thrips on garlic. ¢ Metarhizium ansopliae, Paecilomyces fumosoroseus, Verticillium lecani and Frankliniella also killed T. tabaci sp. Mortality of thrips was highest with B. bassiana at 26°C and 75% RH. Symptoms: Onion maggot is more restricted to cooler coastal climates where onions are grown on organic and muck soils. Maggot is primarily a pest of onions and do not cause economic damage to garlic. This pest occurs in some parts of north India. Pest Management Cultural * Avoid planting in soils that are high in undecomposed organic matter. «Avoid close spacing while planting. * Control of D. antique is exceptional in areas where crop rotation was followed in the previous year. Plant Resistance Commercial varieties, N-2-4-1 and Pusa Ratnar were found resistant to T. tabaci in Punjab but the former was susceptible to thrips in Maharashtra. The variety B-780 is moderately resistant to thrips. In Bihar, Pusa Red and N-53 had lowest thrips population while Arka Niketan had highest infestations. Host Plant Resistance: No resistant varieties are Botanicals available against maggot. Neem was found effective when mixed with insecticides. INSECT MANAGEMENT/ONION AND GARLIC

Biological: Ground beetle is a good predator and _ they can cut off the radical before the plants become establishing grassy refuse strips in onion crop will established. enhance the beetle population and reduce the maggot population. Chemical control «Application of Pirimiphos Methyl or Deltamethrin at 2ml/lit. * Fipronil 80WG (@25 g ai/kg) and Cyromazine (75 WP @ 50 g ai/kg), an insect growth regulator as seed treatment were recommended. Army Worms (Spodoptera exigua, S.litura) and Helicoverpa armigera Hubner This pest occurs sporadically on onion grown for seed. Larvae feed inside the stem and move upward to reach Mite infested bulb the base of the umbel at early stages of flowering. Subsequently it invades the umbel and feeds on Management seeds. Arka Niketan was least attached. * Decaying cole crops, especially cauliflower, may harbour very high bulb mite populations in the field. «Avoid planting successive onion or garlic crops. * Flood irrigation or heavy rains may reduce mite levels in the soil. “In garlic, sow clean seed cloves. « Hot water treatment of seed garlic before planting Infestation of pest on umbel (elfexremel enol o=sis may reduce mite infestation * Soil drenching with Dicofol at 2 ml/1 or soil Pest Management application of powdered sulfur effectively reduce the mite population considerably. Fumigation with Methyl Bromide @16 g/m? for 3 h or 10 g/m? for 6h is recommended for control of mobile phases of the mite in stored garlic. * Pheromone traps can be placed at 125 cm height and dispenser should be regularly replaced for effective trapping. «NPV and Bt can also be employed for control of the pest. * Insecticides like Cypermethrin, Quinolphos, Eriophyid Mite (Aceria tulipae Keifer) Acephate, etc. can be used if infestation is more. Garlic plants infested with mite show symptoms like stunting, twisting, curling and yellow mottling and Bulb Mite (Rhizoglyphus robini Claparede) reduce the plant stand as well as yield. Mites also attack the stored garlic bulbs. Most of the mites are located at the basal portion of cloves and make them dry and desiccated. This pest infests the bulbs by penetrating the outer layer of tissue. The plants wilt and rot as opportunistic fungi and bacteria gain entry inside the bulbs. Bulb mites can reduce plant stands, stunt plant growth, and_ Mite is capable of transmitting viruses such as wheat promote rot of bulbs in storage. On seeded onions, yellow streak mosaic virus in wheat, garlic mosaic virus and onion mosaic caused by Allium 1 virus. Ey 

«Hot water treatment of seed garlic at 55 and 60° C for 10 minutes was also effective but affects clove sprouting capacity. «Fumigation with Methyl Bromide at 32 g/m? for 2 h at 80° F or 3 g/m? Aluminium Phosphide for 72 h in airtight plastic box has been recommended for the control of mite in stored garlic. Red Spider Mite (Tetranychus cinnabarinus) J Symptoms: Tetranychid mites are found through out the world on major vegetable crops. This is emerging as a regular mite pest in onion and garlic. Garlic plants infested with mite Management * Flood irrigation or heavy rains may reduce field populations. «Avoid planting successive onion or garlic crops. Management « Wettable Sulfur 0.3% + Dimethoate (0.03%) « Spraying miticides like Dicofol and Ethion. as pre-sowing and post-sowing treatment is Even a thorough water spray also washes off the recommended. mites from the plant. «Seed dressing and plant stand treatments with 0.5% Sulfur and 0.1% Dimethoate are also effective in controlling mites. INSECT MANAGEMENT/ONION AND GARLIC 2



» MANAGEMENT TOMATO «Field sanitation by plucking the lower leaves and burning of infected crop debris. ¢ Summer ploughing to increase the desiccation of pathogen and infected plant parts. «Minimize relative humidity in plant canopy for preventing the infection. * Two spray of Chlorothalonil @0.2% at 8 days interval is effective against the disease but spray must be started soon after infection on floral part. Alternaria Blight (Al/ternaria solani, A. alternata f.sp. lycopersici) Symptoms Irregular leaf spots mostly appear from marginal portion of leaves. In many tomato cultivars, symptoms are V shaped and progress towards midrib. These lesions are having prominent yellowing on their outer margin due to host specific toxin produced by the pathogen. Mostly disease appears in vegetative phase of plant growth before flowering. Symptoms of early blight appear on all above ground parts of the plant. Pre and post emergence damping off in seedbeds also occurs. Late Blight (Phytophthora infestans) Symptoms Blight appears on foliage as light-pale green water soaked dead area. The lesions are wet in morning and dried, shriveled in daylight. It enlarges rapidly until entire leaves are killed and exposing all the fruits for infection. In moist and cloudy weather a downy white fungus develops near the outer margin of lesion on underside of the leaves. Green and ripe fruit affected by the blight appear as greenish brown and internal tissues become spongy with bad odour. Elongated & concentric on stem/ fruit lesions/ foliage due to alternaria Management * Crop rotation with non-solanaceous host is essential for effective reduction of inoculum. * Healthy seeds should be collected only from — disease-free fruits. a Phytophthora blight on green fruits

Management «Always use healthy and certified seeds collected from disease-free area. * Infected crop debris and fruits must be collected from the field and burnt. «Preventive sprays of Mancozeb@ 0.25% provide good control in cloudy, cold and drizzling weather but spray interval should be 5 to 7 days. * One spray of Metalaxyl+ Mancozeb@0.2% is very effective when applied within two days of infection but repetitive sprays should not be given. «Staking of plant reduces all phytophthora diseases of tomato. Sclerotia on fruits Collar Rot (Sclerotium rolfsii) Symptoms Management The first symptom of disease is observed as soft tissue « Use crop rotation with cereals, corn, sorghum and necrosis of bark of the stem near soil line. White, millets. cottony and silvery mycelial growth is clearly visible + Removeall the weeds from field. on the affected portion. Fungal growth is also found Avoid use of infested farmyard manure, soil crop just below the soil surface. Later on white to light debris and compost in the field. brown mustard like sclerotium is observed on the |rrigate the soil in summer and plough the field to same portion. Progressive dropping and yellowing destroy germinating sclerotia. followed by wilting of the entire plant is observed. Green manuring followed by application Sometime plants collapse soon after infection. The of Trichoderma @ 5 kg/ha within a week of disease is soil borne where pathogen survives in the ploughing. form of sclerotia. * Seedlings dip in Trichoderma@ 1% for 10 minutes. It has wide host range and causes severe problem on Avoiddense planting and maintain proper aeration tomato, brinjal, chilli, cowpea, French bean, bottle near collar region. gourd, sponge gourd, ash gourd, ridge gourd and Use Ammonium Nitrate as a fertilizer for nitrogen elephant foot yam. The incidence in tomato alone is source. 15-20% every year with 20-25% yield loss in farmers Drench Copper Oxychloride @ 0.3% near the field. collar region followed by carbendazim @ 0.1% for immediate control. ¢ Fungicide drenching should be done preferably in evening. Pseudocercospora Leaf Blight (Pseudocercospora fuligena) Olivacious black sooty growth of fungus was observed on the lower surface of the leaves. Symptoms are only observed on the leaves. Leaf defoliate soon m4 after infection. No discoloration was observed on the Wilting by collar rot corresponding upper side of the leaves. 

Management * Cut the infected plant parts along with some healthy portion in morning and carefully collect in polythene to avoid falling of sclerotia in the field. Burn all these materials away from field. «Foliar spray of Carbendazim @ 0.1% at flowering stage followed by spray of mancozeb @ 0.25% in cool, cloudy and humid weather. Fruit Rots SE ult Re iu R ei lele Several fruit rotting pathogens viz. Pythium and Phytophthora affect green fruits while Rhizoctonia, Management Myrothecium, Colletotrichum, Phomopsis, Alternaria * Collect and burn the infected leaves. and Cladosporium affect matured fruits. Average * One spray of hexaconazole or triademefon or 40% yield loss is recorded every year due to fruit rot bitertanol @ 0.05% at 7-10 days interval. pathogen. « Be careful for selecting exotic hybrids and varieties. Symptoms Myrothecium fruit rot on green as well as ripe fruit appeared as water soaked rotting with prominent Symptoms concentric zonation. White to black numerous bodies Infection starts during flowering stage. Soft, wet, water were observed on each rings of rotting. Rhizoctonia soaked rotting of stem, leaves, fruits, and flowers are fruit rot is most serious disease of kharif tomato. observed followed by white fungal growth over it. Symptoms appear as rhythmic rotting of fruits This mycelium develops honeydew stage soon after coming with the soil contact. Rotting is immediately colonization. Later on after drying, the entire portion followed by cracking and fungal growth over it. is converted into compact mycelial mat followed by Buckeye fruit rot caused by Phytophthora parasitica hard sclerotial body. Fruits are severely affected where was observed mostly in green fruits. Symptoms of sclerotia formed inside and outside of the fruits. ripe fruit rot caused by Colletorichum coccodes were The disease is observed in December to January also observed, as black, dry and corky rotting with during low temperature, cloudy weather and high acervuli over it. Sclerotium fruit rot is very clear due atmospheric humidity accompanied by soil moisture. to white fungal mycelium and mustard grain like sclerotia over fruits. Sclerotinia fruit rot is having bigger and irregular sclerotia over it. Generally lower portion of fruits are infected which are coming in soil contact. White Rot (Sclerotinia sclerotiorum) ee >. Sclerotinia on fruits rot rothecium fruit rot = Rhizoctonia fruit rot DISEASE MANAGEMENT/TOMATO

Management to fruit initiation stage. The disease in prevalent in «Avoid the contact of fruit from soil by staking of warm humid weather when RH is more than 90% and plant. temperature is between 25 and 35°C. «Provide proper drainage in the field. a “Green manuring followed by soil application of ' Trichoderma @ 5 kg/ha in soil is very effective in checking most of the fruit rotting. * Collect affected fruit and buy them to reduce primary inoculums. Grey Leaf Spot (Stemphillium solani) Symptoms Small circular dark brown necrotic, numerous spots appear all over the leaf lamina that is uniformly distributed on entire foliage. Sometimes clear narrow yellow halo is visible around the spots. Usually these spots are isolated but in later stage they coalesce to each other. Severely infected older leaves blight and fall down. Small elongated to circular lesions appear on stem after brightening of leaves. Management Bacterial leaf blight * Periodical monitoring of the crop for initiation of disease from last fortnight of December to first week of January. * Foliar spray of either Mancozeb @ 0.25% or Chlorothalonil @ 0.2% two to three times at 7-10 days interval. «Restricted used of exotic hybrids. * Removal and burning of all crop debris after senescence of the crop. Bacterial Spot (Xanthomonas campestris pv. vesicatoria) Symptoms Small, dark spots appear on leaflets and stems of seedlings transplanted crop. Numerous spots coalesce and cause severe burning of the leaves. Prominent yellow halo is observed around the spot. The most conspicuous and damaging phase is infection of immature fruits. Small water soaked spots appear on exposed surfaces of the green and turning red fruits. These are slightly raised and corky is appearance. Disease appear in rainy season and continued up Bacterial canker on fruits 

Management Management ¢ Summer ploughing to desiccate the bacteriaand + Seed dipping in Streptocycline solution @ 100 host. ppm. ¢ Soil solarization in nursery bed to avoid seedling + Summer ploughing to desiccate the bacteria and infection. host. * Rotation of nursery seedbed and main field. * Seed should be collected from disease free plants. «Seed should be collected from disease free plants. « One spray of Streptocycline @ 150-200 ppm in «Seed dipped in streptocycline solution @ 100 ppm. afternoon. «Adopt intercropping of urd and mung as mulches « One spray of Copper Oxychloride @ 0.3% after 10 to prevent rain splash. days of antibiotic application. * One spray of Streptocycline @ 150-200 ppm followed by one spray of Copper Oxychloride @ Leaf Curl Complex (Virus-transmitted by 0.2% in afternoon. white fly as well as by mechanical injury) * Use tolerant line of tomato like LE-415. Symptoms * One spray of copper oxychloride @ 0.3% after Disease appear in severe forms during the month of fifteen days of antibiotic application. September to November. Leaves show downward rolling, curling, twisting and chlorosis. Plants show stunting, shortening of internodes, bushy appearance, tomato) no flowering and fruiting at later stage of virus Symptoms infection. Sometimes leaves show light and dark mottle It is characterized by absence of chlorotic halo around symptoms. Since geminivirus and TMV both viruses spot, crusty and comparatively larger spots. Sometime are involved in most of the infection, therefore it gives yellow halo is observed in this Pseudomonas species. The mixed infection of leaf curl complex in kharif tomato. spots are necrotic, circular to roughly circular. As the fruit approaches the pink stage, the tissue around the spot retains its green colour longer than normal. Small black spots appear on leaf, petiole, pedicel, and peduncle while irregular, elongated lesions appear on stem. Bacterial speck is favoured by cool, moist, weather and temperature range between 15 and 25° C. Generally, disease is observed in winter season when fruit starts ripening. Bacterial Speck (Pseudomonas syringae pv. Tomato leaf curl complex Management « Removal of weed host from field near surrounding areas. ¢ Root dipping in Imidacloprid solution @ 4-5 ml per litre of water for one hour during transplanting of the seedlings. Bacterial speak on leaves DISEASE MANAGEMENT/TOMATO

- Nursery should be grown in nylone net to check + Avoid transplanting before September to check the white fly infection. the twig blight phase. * Seed treatment with hot water at 50°C or 10% + Crop rotation is required with cereals at least trisodium phosphate solution for 25 minutes. three-year. «Use barrier crop of taller non-host crops like maize, « Use tolerant cultivars. bajra and sorghum. * Infected crop residue and fallend mummified fruits * Collect healthy seeds from disease free plants. should be collected and burnt. * Periodical sprays of systemic insecticides up to = Spray carbendazim @ 0.1% after 10 to 15 days of flower setting. ¢ Avoid mechanical injury during intercultural transplanting and during flower setting. operations. « Use tolerant varieties. Rhizoctonia Root Rot (Rhizoctonia solani) * Roughing of infected plants soon after infection at_ Symptoms initial stage of growth. Lesions start on stem near collar region at or below the soil level and move downward into the roots. Later on BRINJAL drooping and wilting of the plant is observed. Disease Phomopsis Blight (Phomopsis vexans) is more common in poorly drained soil and the fields having prolonged excessive moisture. Symptoms Leaves show clearly defined circular, light brown spots mostly in lower leaves. Center of the spots is slightly lighter in colour. These spots are papery, often crack and some time shot hole. Sometime irregular, big lesions are also observed on leaves particularly in cool and humid weather. Stem lesions are started form basal part near nodal region as gray dry rot with constriction. Bark partially dries but later on entire twig dries. This leads to drying of few twigs or partial wilting of some portions of plants. Pale to light brown sunken spots develop on the old fruits. Individual spots expand and coalesce to cover most part of the fruit. Ree elt: mutt Management * Crop rotation with sugarcane and wheat is important for inoculums reduction of this soil pathogen. «All infected plants must be uprooted and burnt along with field sanitation by removing all the weeds. *« Summer ploughing followed by irrigation in between April to June and then again ploughing to reduce the activated soil inoculums. Management ¢ Green manuring in June and July followed by soil * Treatment of seed with carbendazim @ 0.25% is application of Trichoderma @ 5 kg/ha soon after essential to eliminate seed inoculum. ploughing of the sunhemp. 

- Seedlings dip in Trichoderma @1% suspension for « Green manuring in June and July followed by soil 10 minutes before transplanting. application of Trichoderma @ 5 kg/ha soon after ¢ Drenching of Trichoderma @ 1% suspension after ploughing of the sunhemp. 15 days of transplanting and repeat at 15 days + Crop debris and infected plant parts should be intervals if required. carefully cut along with some healthy part and «Maintain proper drainage and aeration in the field. collected form the field in the morning. These * Balanced dose of fertilizers including should be burnt without shattering and falling of micronutrients is effective for reducing the sclerotia in the field. disease. * Spray Carbendazim @ 0.1% soon after flowering. *« Drenching of Carbendazim @ 0.1% near collar « Alternate spray of Mancozeb @ 0.25% at 8-10 days region is a costly control measure and moreover interval of Carbendazim spray. ensures the status of previously applied + Dense planting should be avoided to reduce the Trichoderma during use of Carbendazim. shade and humidity in plant canopy. Sclerotinia Rot (Sclerotinia sclerotiorum) Collar Rot (Sclerotium rolfsii) Symptoms Symptoms Infection takes place on leaves, twigs, flowers and The first symptom of disease is observed as soft tissue fruits. Water soaked lesions develop and the infected necrosis of bark of the stem near soil line. White, tissue macerated by the pathogen. Plants start dying cotton like and silvery mycelium growth is clearly from apical portion because primary infection always visible on the affected portion. Fungal growth was takes place on flowers leading to rotting of adjoining also found just below the soil surface. Later on white plant parts. Soft, wet, water soaked rotting of stem, to light brown mustard like sclerotia is observed on leaves, fruits and flowers are observed followed by thesame portion. Progressive dropping and yellowing white fungal growth over it. Later on after drying of oy wilting of the entire plant is observed. Sometime the entire portion of pith and fruits it is converted in to plants collapse soon after infection. The disease is compact mycelial mat followed by hard sclerotial body. coil borne where pathogen survives in the form of These sclerotia become black after drying. Infectionon — sclerotia. lower portion of main stem results in complete wilting of brinjal plant. White rot on twig Stem rotting by sclerotinia Management * Carefully select crop rotation with cereals, corn, Management sorghum and millets because the pathogen is * Crop rotation with flooded rice is beneficial for having broad host range. reducing the soil inoculums. « Remove all the weeds particularly dicot from field. «Summer ploughing in such a way that surface is “* Avoid use of infected farmyard manure, soil, buried deep. compost, etc. in the field. DISEASE MANAGEMENT/BRINJAL

- Irrigate the soil in summer and plough the field to Bacterial Wilt (Ralstonia solanacearum) destroy germinating sclerotia. Symptoms ¢ Green manuring followed by application of The lower leaves droop before wilting occurs. The Trichoderma @ 5 kg/ha withings a week of vascular systems become light brown. Root and ploughing. . —— rootlets are rotted leaving only corky portion of main * Seedlings dipped in Trichoderma @ 1% for 10 root. Wilt and sudden death are seldom accompanied minutes. by the chlorosis of the leaves. The pathogen is soil inhabitant, persisting for long period in same soils. Bacteria enters in the plant through inter cultural wounds, nematode injury usually under ground surface. Relatively high soil moisture, soil temperature and acidic soil pH favour the disease. The disease is prevalent in warmer climates having high humidity under tropical and sub-tropical conditions. « Avoiddense planting and maintain proper aeration near collar region. «Always use ammonium nitrate as a fertilizer for nitrogen source. ¢« Drench Copper Oxychloride @ 0.3% near the collar region followed by Carbendazim @ 0.1% for immediate control. ¢ Fungicide drenching should be done preferably in evening. Management Pseudocercospora Leaf Blight « When the pathogen is established in soil, (Pseudocercospora sp.) satisfactory control is very difficult. Symptoms «Always prefer to grow tolerant varieties because chemical control is neither feasible nor economic. «Infested soil should be kept fallow for about a year and frequently disked during the summer season to accelerate desiccation of plant debris and death of bacteria. « Use of antagonistic bacteria, neem cake, and organic matter as soil application. ¢ Maintain soil pH to neutral by liming. «Avoid water stagnation and anaerobic conditions in the field. «Light texture of soil and well-drained field reduces the disease incidence. «Follow long crop rotation with cereals and non- During winter olivacious black sooty growth of fungus was observed on the lower surface of the leaves. Symptoms are only observed on the corresponding upper side of the leaves. i : solanaceous host. EET Little Leaf (Phytoplasma) Symptoms Management Characteristic symptoms are excessive shortening of the leaves. Numerous leaves aggregate in each branch * Collect and burn the infected leaves. giving bushy appearance and shortening of internodes. * Spray Hexaconazole or Triademefon or Bitertanol Auxiliary buds enlarge but petioles and leaves remain @ 0.05% when disease appears. small, narrow, pale green and soft. Purple coloured * Restricted use of exotic susceptible hybrids and _ fruits characteristically become white after infection. varieties is advocated. Later stage of infection leads to complete sterility of 

the plant. The disease is caused by phytoplasma like observed in first fruiting. Fruit rot extends to the seed cavity making it internally seed borne pathogen. St ee DO ea ean Management * Periodical spray of systemic insecticides is necessary to control vector. * Uproot the severely infected plants and burn just before starting of spray schedule. «Avoid early transplanting before third week of A ; Management ugust to escape leafhopper population. * During first sign of initial infection, spray * Disease free seeds should be collected from Tetracycline @ 100 ppm twice at 10-12 days interval healthy fruits. to check the multiplication of phytoplasma in the * Screening of diseased fruits must be done after host tissue. drying of the fruits. *« Seeds should be treated with Carbendazim @ 0.25% during sowing. CHILLI/CAPSICUM * Seedling should be sprayed by Carbendazim Dieback and Anthracnose (Choanephora @ 0.1% before transplanting. capsici, Colletotrichum capsici) * Cut the rotting twigs along with healthy part and Symptoms burn it. Disease initiate on tender twigs from the apical top of |“ Foliarspray of Copper Oxychloride @ 0.3% followed the plant as necrosis and withering. It progresses from by Carbendazim @ 0.1% at flowering stage. tip to downward. Choanephora capsici rotted leaves“ Avoid apical injury during transplanting and also and twigs clearly show black sporangial structure over at flowering stage. it. The twigs are water soaked, brown and dieback as “* Collect all the green fruits of first setting and the infection spreads downward. Later on infected consume it. Do not keep these fruits for seed twigs developed several minute acervuli. Symptoms purpose. on red fruits are more commonly observed than green fruits. Small, irregular, sunken, light brown lesions were Bacterial Leaf Spot observed on mature fruit. Most often they are coalesced Symptoms and become papery on green fruits. Apparently fruits The disease is common from nursery stage to looking healthy during harvestmayshowthesymptoms vegetative stage of plant growth. Symptoms may of diseases during drying. Maximum infection was appear any time up to first flowering. Very small, DISEASE MANAGEMENT/CHILLI/CAPSICUM Pe

circular spot surrounded by yellow halo is mostly Management observed in leaves. Affected lower leaves become Cut the infected plant parts along with some yellow and fall down. Bacterial spots remain green healthy portion in morning and carefully collect in and appear as spot bending symptoms on completely polythene to avoid falling of sclerotia in the field. yellow leaves. Burn all these materials away from field. «Foliar spray of Carbendazim @ 0.1% at flowering stage followed by Mancozeb @ 0.25%. Leaf Blight (A/ternaria alternata and Cercospora capsici) Symptoms = , Disease is observed as circular to oblong spots with Reo coae eee light gray to white gray centers and dark brown margins. Small spots coalesce to each other in severe Management case and leads to defoliation. Alternaria spots are dark « One spray of Streptocycline @ 150 ppm alternated brown, irregular and covered with a grayish brown to with Kasugamycin @ 0.2%. black spores of the pathogens. In moist conditions, « Seed dipping in Streptocycline solution @ 100 sporulation of both pathogens was observed on the ppm for 30 minutes. spots. i 4 White Rot (Sclerotinia sclerotiorum) -. Symptoms Soft, wet, water soaked rotting is observed on stem followed by white fungal growth over it. Infected stem turns white after drying. This mycelium develops honeydew stage soon after colonization. Later on, the entire pith of stem dried and converted into compact mycelial mat followed by hard sclerotical Management * One foliar spray of Chlorothalonil @ 0.2% alternated by thiophenate-methyl@ 0.1% after 8-10 days. * Selection of disease free and certified seeds to check the primary infection. * Foliar spray of Tricel @ 0.2% to maintain crop vigour at 10-12 days interval. «Field sanitation by burning of infected crops debris followed by summer ploughing. Sclerotinia rot of capsicum 

Phytophthora Leaf blight/Fruit Rot * Staking of plant reduces the disease infection.. Symptoms «Rotation, water management and drainage are the cultural methods. Phytophthora can attack leaves, roots and fruits. «Avoid over cropping and high nitrogen. Sometimes sudden wilting and death of plants occur mid-season at fruiting stage. Often a number of plants ina row show these symptoms. Commonly the disease strikes older plants. Stem lesions can occur at any level Symptoms on stem and an irreversible wilt of the foliage occurs. Chilli leaf curl complex is mainly due to CMV and Leaves first show small dark green spots that enlarge gemini virus as well as mites and thrips. Reduction in & become bleached. Infected fruits initially develop size of leaves, shortening of veins, puckering, mottling dark, water soaked patches that become coated with of the leaves, stunting and bushy appearance of the white mold and spores of the fungus and eventually plant are symptoms of viral infection. Conspicuous rot. Fruits wither but remain attached to the plant. outgrowth and prominent veins are visible on lower It is very difficult to manage this disease once the side of the leaves. Downward rolling, narrowing and pathogen becomes established in a field. Pathogen shortening of leaves due to mite infestation were infects fruits during prolonged period of rainfall, high observed. humidity, over-crowded plants and high nitrogen. Leaf Curl Complex (CMV and Gemini Virus) Leaf curl symptoms Management «Always use healthy and certified seeds collected from disease-free area. * Infected crop debris and fruits must be collected from the field and burnt. «Preventive sprays of Mancozeb@ 0.25% provide good control in cloudy, cold and drizzling weather. “One spray of Metalaxyl+ Mancozeb @ 0.2% is very effective when applied within two days of infection but repetitive sprays should not be given. Management *« Root dipping of the seedlings in Imidacloprid solution @ 4-5 ml per litre of water for one hour during transplanting. «Nursery should be grown in nylon net to check the vector infestation. «Seed treatment with hot water at 50°C or 10% tri sodium phosphate solution for 25 minutes. ¢ Barrier crop of taller non-host crops like maize, bajra and sorghum. * Collect healthy seeds from disease-free plants. DISEASE MANAGEMENT/CHILLI/CAPSICUM

«Periodical alternate spray of Dicofal @ 0.25% with OKRA wettable sulpher @ 0.2% and one to two spray of Leaf Blight (Cercospora abelmoschi systemic insecticide. epee ystemi — and C. hibisina) “« Use tolerant varieties Symptoms * Initial rouging of infected plants soon after infection and burn it. The fungus causes no definite leaf spot but grow as sooty to dark olivaceous, ectoparasite covering entire Sun Scald leaf lamina. Disease initiated as small isolated fungal growth on lower side of leaf but very soon it spreads on both sides. Infected leaves fall down very quickly after drooping and rolling. It causes severe loss in seed production crop as well as the late sown crop grown for green fruits. Sometimes light brown lesions are observed after washing out of spores from leaves due to rainfall. Symptoms It isacommon physiological disorder and fruits facing direct sun rays are affected by sun scald. Symptoms include a whitish necrotic area on the side of the fruit exposed to a fierce, usually afternoon, sun. The flesh becomes light, dry and papery on areas that had direct sunlight on them and can cover up to one-third of the fruit. Black mould fungus on leaves a oe Ci rh Sun scald Management * Two to three foliar spray of Bitertanol @ 0.05% or Difenconazole @ 0.025% or Hexaconazole or Triadimefon @ 0.05% at 6 days interval. * Spray should be started immediately after disease initiation; delay in spray schedule will not give proper control due to very fast secondary infection rate. * Okra sowing should be completed latest by first week of July. «Collect the defoliated leaves and burn in field itself to reduce the inoculums at source. Management *« Adequate fertility and proper water management will help to develop the canopy of leaves and foliage required to protect the fruit from sun scald. «Shade crop like Dhaincha can also be grown on border to protect the crop from hot winds during summer. “Poor foliage cover allows the defect to occur. «Variety selection may play a role; compact plants may not provide cover as well as more vigorous plants. Ey 

Yellow Vein Mosaic (YVMV- Gemini virus) then seeds are unfertile and aborted. Characteristically Symptoms small, green, outgrowths are observed on vein and The viral disease is transmitted by whitefly. Early vein-lets of the lower side of leaves. infection causes 20-30% yield loss. Characteristic symptoms appears as prominent yellow vein and vein lets having green tissue interveinal area. Severely infected leaves some-time become completely golden yellow. Fruits develop green to yellow colour and become hard in early stage of growth. pu ae , Yellow vein mosaic Management * Seed treatment with Imidacloprid @ 5 ml per kg of seed. « Use resistant variety «Early sowing in last month of June to first week of July. * Once or twice rouging of infected plants at initial se ee a : em hea Twig bending by ELCV Management stage of plant growth. ; . . “Periodical spray of any safe systemic insecticide up Seed treatment with Imidacloprid @ 5 ml per kg to flowering stage. of seed. wage & Removal of malvaceous hosts around the field “Once or twice rouging of infected plants at initial stage. Enation Leaf Curl (ELCV) «Use tolerant cultivars. * One to two sprays of Abamectin @ 0.05% upto eymptoms flowering stage. The disease is second most destructive viral disease of okra after YVMV in kharif season. The disease is caused by geminivirus and transmitted by whitefly. The plant Root-Knot Nematode becomes unable to bear its weight after viral infection. (Meloidogyne incognita) The stem and leaf petiole are bent. Apical portion of Symptoms plant develop into full of small, curl and aggregated Diesease appears as stunting of the plants, yellowish leaves. Floral part does not set the fruit. Fruit if sets green of the plant and some-times drooping of the DISEASE MANAGEMENT/OKRA

leaves. Plant shows hunger sign. Clear symptoms are |Vianagement observed after uprooting of the plant where roots are Long crop rotation with wheat and bajra. full of knots. Main and lateral root bears spherical to = Field sanitation by uprooting and burning of all elongated galls of variable size. infected plants. * Summer fallowing, ploughing accompanied with Management irrigation followed by again ploughing in summer «Apply neem cake @ 25 q/ha or saw dust @ 28 q/ha to reduce the soil inoculum. along with 120 kg nitrogen before transplanting. = = Green manuring in June and July followed by soil * Phorate or Aldicarb @ 25 kg/ha should be applied application of Trichoderma @ 5 kg/ha soon after if neem cake is not available. ploughing of the sunhemp. * Crop rotation with cereals and low land paddy for Seed treatment with Trichoderma @ 0.6 to 1% at least 2 years. depending upon soil and pathogen status. * Summer ploughing for desiccation of nematode. = Drenching of Trichoderma @ 1% suspension after * Sowing of marigold is very effective for reduction 20 days of sowing in beans only. in larval population. ¢« Maintain proper drainage and aeration in the field. LEGUMINOUS & VEGETABLES « Balanced dose of fertilizers including (PEA AND BEANS) micronutrients. * Drenching of Carbendazim @ 0.1% for immediate Root and Stem Rot (Fusarium solani, control. Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. pisi and Rhizoctonia solani) Symptoms Infection leads to drooping and wilting of plants at early stage of plant growth. In pea, symptoms appear as vascular discoloration of stem and reddish appearance in the pith extending towards roots. This is a characteristic symptom of Fusarium solani in pea. Sometimes general yellowing of entire plants is observed in cowpea due to Fusarium infection. Rhizoctonia infection in peas results dropping followed by wilting of the entire plants. The bark of collar region and root portion develops complete rots and degenerate. This is easily peeled off with slight Collar Rot (Sclerotium rolfsii) Symptoms The disease become ubiquitous with broad host range. Initially wet rotting of bark is observed. Rot covers entire bark of the plant near collar region. Characteristic symptoms are observed as white, fungus growth on affected portion as well as on contact soil. Gradually the hyphal mat is converted into small, mustard like sclerotia that survives in the soil. Management * Crop rotation with low land paddy and other pressure on bark leaving only pith portion. Symptoms cereals. appear on stem near the soil level and extend «Field sanitation by uprooting and burning of all downward into the roots and upward also. Lesions infected plants. are somewhat sunken and reddish brown. Lateronas * Summer fallowing, ploughing accompanied with the lesions enlarge, they turn gray to ash colour at the irrigation followed by again ploughing in summer centre and numerous minute, black dot like fruiting to reduce the soil inoculums. body developed from the centre. The inner portion of | Green manuring in June and July followed by soil stem pith becomes hollow. Dull white mycelial growth application of Trichoderma @ 5 kg/ha soon after is observed near soil line at initial stage of infection in ploughing of the sunhemp. humid weather. 

- Seed treatment with Trichoderma @ 0.6 to 1% Rust (Uromyces fabae, Uromyces pisi and depending upon soil and pathogen status. U. phaseoli) « Remove all weeds from field. * Drench Trichoderma @ 1% suspension after 20 days of sowing to reduce early infection in beans. ¢ Drench Copper Oxychloride @ 0.3% near the collar region in evening for immediate disease control in beans only. Symptoms Characteristic symptoms observed as minute, slightly raised pustules on all above ground plant parts. Generally elongated pustules are seen on stem. Rust pustules are never observed on pods of pea. These pustules on pea are distinct, faint yellow, circular consisting of numerous uredospores. Later on dark red coloured teleutospores are formed on the leaves and tendrils. Early bloom stage of crop to four weeks Symptoms before harvest is most critical period for rust and Diesease appears as white to light gray, powdery must be protected from the infection. fungal spores on leaves, twigs, tendrils and pods as pustules. Soon these pustules coalesce and cover all foliar part of pea. Infection of pods leads to partial filling of the grain and pod remain smaller in size. Outer skin of infected pods becomes gray in colour and rough. Powdery Mildew (Erysiphe pisi) 1 Vere | We Ais Powdery mildew on foliage Management «Avoid delay in sowing and complete up to first fortnight of October. «Always use tolerant varieties. « FoliarsprayofPenconazole @0.025%orTridemorph @ 0.1% or Dinocap @ 0.1% at 5-7 days interval. * Infected crop debris must be burnt after harvesting of pods. Rust pustules on cowpea DISEASE MANAGEMENT/LEGUMINOUS & VEGETABLES (PEA AND BEANS) [iy

Management «Spray should be started immediately after disease * Burning of infected crop debris is very effective for initiation. Delay in spray schedule may not give reduction of inoculum. proper control due to very fast secondary infection « Use rust tolerant variety of pea. rate. « Avoid delay in sowing of pea and complete up to * Avoid delay in sowing of kharif cowpea and it must first fortnight of October. be completed latest by last week of June. + Fungicidal sprays should be done in critical period * Collect the defoliated leaves and burn in field itself if an average of two pustules per leaf is observed to reduce the inoculum at source. in the field. + Use Flusilazole or Hexaconazole @ 0.025 % or Sclerotinia Blight (Sclerotinia sclerotiorum) Bitertanol @ 0.05% or Triadimephon @ 0.05% at Symptoms interval of 5-7 days for effective control. Disease is observed as wet, soft and white rotting of the tissues. Very soon white fungus growth is observed Leaf Blight (Pseudocercospora cruenta on the rotted portion. Later on embedded sclerotia in and Cercospora cruenta) white mycelium is formed on the infected portion as Symptoms well asinner portion of pith and fruits. Primary infection Disease appears as black, sooty and moldy growth of on pea and cow pea always starts from floral infection fungus on all foliar part. Initially the spore mass are followed by pods. Seeds converted into sclerotia olivaceous dark brown and spread very fast in the become concomitant mixture during threshing. field. Quick defoliation is characteristic feature of the disease, which leads to naked stem and twigs on the plant. Symptoms of Cercospora are observed as small circular brown spots with reddish margin. Aschochyta blight is a severe disease of cowpea, French bean and pea. Aschochyta paseolorum infects cowpea producing large, circular to irregular brown spots with reddish margin on leaves and all other plant parts. Sclerotina rot in French be Management «All infected part must be carefully collected and burnt before drying of the plants. * Seed cleaning is essential to remove the sclerotial mixture during threshing and processing. ¢ Deep ploughing, low land paddy with continuous stagnation of water reduces the sclerotial Pseudocercospora black leaf blight Management population. * Two to three foliar sprays of Hexaconazole @ * Close planting and dense canopy of plant should be avoided. 0.025% or Biteranol @ 0.05% or Difenconazole @ 0.025% at 6 days interval. «Remove all weeds particularly from the field. 

«Fungicidal spray must be started at early bloom + Field sanitation by burning of all the infected stage of flowering stage. leaves and crop debris. «Alternate spray of Cabendazim @ 0.1% and «* Use of clean, disease-free seed and tolerant Mancozeb @ 0.25% at 7-10 days interval is varieties. essential. * Seed soaking in Streptocycline solution @ 100 ppm for 30 minutes. Bacterial Blight (Xanthomonas campestris | * Proper drainage should be maintained in the field pv. phaseoli (common blight); X. phaseoli to avoid water stagnation. var. fuscans (Fuscous blight), Pseudomonas * Sowing time should be adjusted in such a way that syringae pv. phaseolicola (Halo blight), fruiting stage should not coincide with heavy rain P. syringae pv. syringae (Brown spot blight). period. Symptoms Disease is first seen as small translucent, water soaked Cow pea Golden Mosaic (Viral disease) spots on leaves. Symptoms of common blight, fuscous Symptoms blight and brown blight are difficult to differentiate This is an aphid borne viral disease caused by poty on the basis of symptoms except, isolation of casual virus while white fly transmitted mosaic is gemini organism. However, the infected tissue may turn Virus. Symptoms appear as yellow and green mosaic yellow and die to form lesions of various sizes and Patches on the apical leaves. Lateron most of the shapes. Bigger blotch symptoms appear on the leaves leaves become complete yellow. Infected pods turn to in severe cases of common blight particularly in rainy yellow from normal green colour. Fruit setting is also season. Small spots appear on pods of different ages. "educed in infected plants. Vascular discoloration is evident in severe incidence. Halo blight has most of the symptoms of common blight along with a chlorotic halo. Yellow mosaic of cowpea Management ¢ Soilapplication of Carbofuran @ 1.5 kg ai/ha during seed sowing. Bacterial blight in cowpea ¢ Use resistant lines like Arka Garima, Cowpea-263 and KS-10. Management * Rouging of infected plants at initial stage. * Crop rotation of about 2-3 years is sufficient to * Foliar sprays of Abamectin @ 0.05% at 10 days dispose off over wintering bacteria. interval up to flowering stage. DISEASE MANAGEMENT/LEGUMINOUS & VEGETABLES (PEA AND BEANS) (ii

Management . . «Always seed should be collected from healthy Anthracnose (Colletotrichum orbiculare & fruits and disease-free area. C. lagenarium) * Seeds must be treated with Carbendazim @ 0.25%. Symptoms « Field sanitation by burning of crop debris. Disease on leaves is observed as water soaked small Grow crop on bower system to avoid soil contact. yellow spots that enlarge and turn to brown. The Maintain proper drainage in the field. necrotic portion dries and shatters. Elongated water Seed production should be preferably carried out soaked, sunken lesions appear on stem. Light yellow in summer season because summer crop is often to brown discoloration of these stem lesions is due free from pathogen. to abundant sporulation. Severe incidence resulting Foliar sprays of Carbendazin @ 0.1% or infection in juvenile fruits as small, sunken, light brown, Chlorothalonil @ 0.2% but spray must be started cracked spots are observed. Two species are involved soon after infection. in cucurbits because the size of spots is distinct and appear in different weather condition. Downy Mildew \! — 4 (Pseudoperonospora cubensis) TS 4hss : a Symptoms Disease appears as irregular, numerous, small, yellow areas surrounded by green tissues scattered all over the leaf lamina. It appears just like in definite mosaic pattern particularly in cucumber. The yellow areas are angular and bounded by veins. Symptoms on bitter gourd are light brown while grayish brown on pointed gourd without prominent yellowing on these hosts. In high humid weather, faint white downy growth of a oT ‘ 4 pes? r fungus is observed : i 4 ungus Is observed. Anthracnose on leaves Yellow lesions on cucumber leaf Anthracnose on fruits 

Powdery mildew on Brown lesions on bottle gourd Management «Foliar sprays of Penconazole @ 0.05% or Tridemorph @ 0.1% or Carbendazim @ 0.1%, give very good control of the disease. «Use tolerant line. Management “Crop should be grown with wide spacing in well-drained soil. «Air movement and sunlight exposure helps in checking the disease initiation and development. Fruit R Ph hthora cinnamomi, « Bower system of cropping reduces the disease uit Rots ( ytopnthora cinna Pythium, Rhizoctonia, Phomopsis incidence. bi « Field sanitation by burning crop debris to reduce cucurbitae) the inoculums. Symptoms * Seed production should be preferably carried out Disease is mostly observed on matured fruits as in summer season because summer crop is often Comparatively dry rotting with characteristic pycnidia free from disease. over it. Generally lower portion of fruits touching soil & Use tolerant cucumber lines like Summer Prolific. Surface are affected. P. cinnamomi is causing rotting of « Protective spray of Mancozeb @ 0.25% at seven vines, leaves and fruits of pointed gourd, Rhizoctonia days interval gives good control. fruit rot is most severe in muskmelon, while Phomopsis * Insevere case one spray of Metalaxyl+ Mancozeb _ fruit rot on ash gourd. @ 0.2% may be given but it should not be repeated. Powdery Mildew (Sphaerotheca fuligena and Erysiphe cichoracearum) Symptoms Disease appears on all foliar part as white to dull white, powdery growth. This white growth quickly covers most of the leaf surface and leads to heavy reduction in photosynthesis area. Plants may wither and die. Growth of plant and fruits seized. Transpiration rate is very fast from infected leaves. DISEASE MANAGEMENT/CUCURBITS a

it. Black dot like pycnidia is also observed on the affected bark. Syed, JJ — oe Sclerotium rot & sclerotinia rot of bottle gourd vine ge , Gummy stem lesions onsmuskmelon Management «Avoid exotic hybrids and varieties due to high degree of susceptibility. ¢ Summer ploughing and green manuring followed by Trichoderma application. «Maintain proper drainage and aeration in the field. * Seed treatment with Carbendazim @ 0.25%. * One drenching of Carbendazim @ 0.1% near collar Management region. Avoid soil contact of fruit by using bower system * Avoid injury near collar region. of cultivation and staking of plant. « Provide proper drainage in the field. Leaf Spots (Cercospora citrullina, Alternaria “Green manuring followed by soil application of |Cucumerina and Corynespora melonis, Trichoderma @ 5 kg/ha in soil is very effective in Didymella bryoniae (teleomorph) and checking most of the fruit rotting. Phoma cucurbitacearum anamorph) * Collect affected fruits and burn them to reduce Symptoms Phomopsis rot in ash gourd Sclerotium rot in ash gourd primary inoculum. Severity of the disease is increasing every year and engulfing ridge gourd, bottle gourd, pointed gourd, Gummy Stem Blight (Didymella bryoniae- pumpkin and sponge gourd. Hybrids and exotic teleomorph and Phoma cucurbitacearum materials of bottle gourd and ridge gourd are highly anamorph) susceptible to Didymella leaf blight. It is spreading Symptoms throughout the cucurbits growing area. Papery This disease is now becoming severe in muskmelon, With rhythmic large spots followed by shot hole is bottle gourd and sponge gourd. Most of the hybrids observed in Didymella. Black small dot like fruiting are susceptible to the disease. Introduction of hybrids structures are also observed on the old spots. White introduced this disease in all cucurbits growing area. fungus growth is clearly visible on outer margins of Initially water soaked area are observed on the stem the spots in morning periods. Several other types of near soil line. Later on translucent gum like exudates leaf spots occur on different cucurbits. Often these leaf released from the affected portion is deposited over spot diseases are more pronounced at maturity stage. 

Circular spots with variable size are observed on the As the disease progresses, more leaves wilt and leaf lamina. They are light brown to dark brown with eventually an entire plant is wilted. When wilted stems white centre in Cercospora. are cross-sectioned, viscid and sticky bacterial matrix exudates from the vascular bundles is observes. This feature is used as a means of diagnosis. This is vascular pathogen and differs from other Erwinia spp. unable to degrade middle lamella. The bacteria lives in the bodies of adult cucumber beetles particularly red striped and spotted beetle. Primary infection is produced when beetles feed upon young leaves or cotyledons. The bacteria present in the vessels of infected plants die within 1 or 2 months after the dead plants dry up. = cr. | — Didymella blight on ash gourd Management “Control of cucumber beetles at initial stage from the soil with neem cake or systemic granular insecticides. * Tolerant varieties with restricted use of exotic cucumber lines should be grown. ¢ Summer polughing of soil to expose all the stages of beetles. Management «Field sanitation, selection of healthy seeds and crop rotation reduces disease incidence. «Fungicidal sprays of Mancozeb @ 0.25% alternated with one spray of Hexaconazole @ 0.05%. * Seed production should be preferably carried out in summer season because summer crop is often free from disease. . . . Mosaic and Leaf Distortion Symptoms Most of the cucurbits grown in rainy season are affected by virus disease like cucumber mosaic, green mottle, leaf distortion, water mosaic etc. Generally alternate green and yellow patches with mottling symptoms are observed. Sometimes leaves deform Bacterial Wilt (Erwinia tracheiphila) Symptoms Bacterial wilt isa commonand often destructive disease on cucumber, muskmelon, squash and pumpkin. The first signs of wilt appear usually on individual leaves as drooping, which become flaccid in sunny weather. DISEASE MANAGEMENT/CUCURBITS

and curl downwards. Smalling and narrowing of the «+ FoliarsprayofMancozeb @ 0.25% at disease initiation leaves is also observed in leaf distortion virus. Plants stage and repeat next spray at 6-8 days interval. become small and excessive branching, proliferation One spray for Metalaxyl + Mancozeb @ 0.2% in of the leaves, twigs, petioles, bushy appearance of the severe case may be given but do not repeat. plants are observed. «Use sticker @ 0.1% with fungicide to avoid runoff of droplets. yy Yellow mosaic of pumpkin Ranrooncencuiil res Management * Management of the disease involves destruction SoCo EN Lea ele) 7A Yate edits of diseased hosts and weeds. * Virus free seeds must be used to check the seed Alternaria Leaf Spot (A/ternaria brassicae _ transmission. and A brassicicola) ¢ Initial rouging of the infected plants. Symptoms * Periodical spray of systemic insecticides up to ajternaria leaf spot usually appears in early stage flowering stage to control vectors. of plant growth in cauliflower while in later stage in * Seed production should be preferably carried out cabbage. Alternaria leaf spots are restricted to lower in summer season because summer crop is often — jeaves only and do not cause economic loss to the crop free from virus infection. except when some of the hybrid varieties of cauliflower * Restricted use of exotic hybrids and varieties in are ysed., Symptoms appear as circular light brown bottle gourd, bitter gourd and cucumber. spots on leaves. Concentric rings are clearly visible on the spots. Black sporulation is observed in humid COLE CROPS weather. Cabbage infections do not extend very far in the host tissue. Inflorescence and siliqua are severely infected during seed crop. The curd of cauliflower infected as brown discoloration of individual florets and flower clusters. Downy Mildew (Peronospora parasitica) Symptoms Disease is observed on the leaves. Fine hair like downy growth of fungus is observed on the lower surface of leaves. Corresponding of the fungal growth there is minute pinhead brown necrotic spots visible on the upper surface of leaves, which later on coalesce to each other. It may appear from nursery to curd formation stage. Management : «Field sanitation, disease-free seed and crop = rotation reduce pathogen inoculum. AS Lesions on leaf 

a ee ol Spots on cabbage & concentric ring White rot in cabbage Management « Alternaria leaf spot of cole crops is effectively managed by detaching all the infected lower leaves in morning and then burning. “Spray of Chlorothalonil @ 0.2% along with sticker @ 0.1% in evening hour. «Foliar spray of Carbendazim @ 0.1% at flowering stage, followed by spray of Mancozeb @ 0.25% along with sticker @ 0.1%. * Spray must cover stump and lower region of « Use disease-free seeds from healthy crop. leaves. “One spray of Mancozeb @ 0.25% along with sticker during siliqua formation. Bacterial Black Rot (Xanthomonas campestris pv. campestris) White Rot (Sclerotina sclerotiorum) Symptoms Symptoms The disease often appears along the margins of Disease appears as water soaked rotting of curd, leaves as chlorotic lesions and chlorosis progresses petiole, stalk and stump region of the leaves. Soon in the direction of midrib usually forming V shaped after infection, growth of white mycelium is observed area, which is the most characteristic symptom of all over the infected portion. Cauliflower grown for the disease. Some of the veins and veinlets within seed production is severely affected by the disease and _ chlorotic area turn black in severe cases. Black entire inflorescence collapses. The mycelium develops vascular scar is observed on any detached infected honeydew stage after colonization of the tissue. Later leaves, midribs and veins. Yellowing of leaves on entire rotted portion is converted into compact was observed from lower portion of mid vein in mycelial mat followed by hard black sclerotial body.This severe infection. Disease severity increases rapidly is the resting structure and primary inoculum source. whenever hailstorm is taking place in cropping season. Symptom may appear from any side and Management centre of the leaves. Severe infection results in * Main crop of cauliflower and cabbage should be complete burning of crop of cauliflower before the periodically observednearthestumpregionincool, curd formation. cloudy and moist weather for primary infection. The bacterium is transmitted through seed which * Cut the infected curds, leaves along with some usually enters in the cotyledons through stomata, healthy portion in morning and carefully collectin pass to the young leaves and progress systematically polythene to avoid falling of sclerotia in the field. throughout the plant system. The foliage infection Burn all these materials away from field. and transmission is through water pores, insect DISEASE MANAGEMENT/COLE CROPS

injury, infested soil, storm, cultural practices and ONION AND GARLIC seedlings. Damping Off (Phythium species, Rhizoctonia solani, oxysporum and F. oxysporum f.sp.cepae) Symptoms Symptoms of this disease consist of seed rotting, pre-mergence damping-off and post-emergence damping-off. Management Cultural Methods * Soil solarization of nursery beds with transparent polythylene sheet for 30 days before sowing Bacterial black rot in cabbage provides good control. ¢ Agricultural practices that minimize periods of Management excessive soil moisture, crop rotation, land leveling, «Always collect seeds from disease-free plants for installing drains, sowing of clean and healthy next year use. seed on raised beds are used to reduce seedling *« Seed treatment with hot water (50°C for 30 diseases. Overcrowding of plants or dense sowing minutes) or seed dipping in 100 ppm antibiotic of onion seeds should be avoided solution for 30 minutes. «Well decomposed farmyard manure should be “Crop rotation with non-cruciferous crops. used in nursery. ¢ Use intercrop of urd and mung as mulches to reduce rain splash. Biological Method Detach the lower infected leaves in afternoon * Seed treatment with Trichoderma viride @ 4 g/ when dew and bacterial ooze dried up from the kg seed followed by soil application of T.viride @ leaves and then burn it. 500 g multiplied in 50 kg farmyard manure/ ha. *« Nursery site should be changed frequently to avoid seedling infection. ¢ Use antagonistic bacteria in the soil. * Spraying of antibiotic like Streptocycline @ 150-200 ppm or Kasugamycin @ 0.2% at 10-15 days interval. «Mixture of steptrocycline @ 100 ppm and copper oxycholoride @ 0.3% with sticker @ 0.1% should be used if Alternaria infection also exists on the foliage giving good control of both the diseases. * The cauliflower variety Pusa Snowball K-1, Super Snowball and cabbage variety Pusa Mukta possesses high degree of tolerance to black rot pathogen. Chemical Methods «Using protectant fungicides such as thiram or captan @ 0.2% as seed dressing before sowing. * Drenching the nursery beds with captan or thiram @ 0.2% or carbendazim @ 0.1% or Copper Oxychloride @ 0.3% in standing crop should be done. Purple Blotch (Alternaria porri ) Symptoms Initially, small white sunken spots develop on the leaves. These spots enlarge, become eye shaped under moist conditions, turn to purple and are surrounded by a broad chlorotic margin. Infection can cause a semi watery rot of necks of bulbs, which turn yellow- red, bulb tissue eventually become papery. 

ii) Host Plant Resistance * Onion varieties Agri found Light Red, Agrifound Dark Red, Red Globe and VL Piyaz 3 are reported to be moderately resistant. iii) Biological Methods «Application of Trichoderma viride (1000 spores/mll), Difenoconazole @ 0.8 ml/Land covering crops with transparent polythene sheets inhibited growth of the pathogen. r « ’ a : =’, iv) Chemical Methods Er Te let Lear tel Teele reds * Four sprays of Mancozeb or Chlorothalonil and 3 sprays of lprodione @ 0.25 % at 10 days interval is effective in reducing the disease. *« Acombination of Mancozeb @0.25% + Abamectin @ 0.05% is effective in controlling thrips as well as purple blotch. * Heat treatment of onion bulbs at 35°C for 8 hours before planting and prophylatctic spray of Metalzxyl + Mancozeb @0.25% gave good control in onion seed crop. Stemphylium Leaf Blight (Stemphylium vesicarium (Wallr.) Simmons) The fungus causes serious damage in a complex with A. porri. The disease is more severe in rabi than in kharif season as higher temperatures prevail during March-April, and the area under cultivation of onion is extensive during that season. Symptoms The first symptoms of the disease appear on the Blotch infection on stem & umbel radical leaves at 3-4 leaf stage. The disease symptoms are developed in the middle of the leaf as small yellow Management to orange flecks or streaks, which soon develop into i) Cultural Methods elongated, spindle shaped to ovate elongate diffused spots surrounded by characteristic pinkish margin. The spots coalesce into extended patches, blighting the leaves and gradually the entire foliage. “Crop rotation with non-host crops; good drainage and use of recommended doses of N and fertilizers reduce the disease incidence. * Hot water soaking of onion seed (50°C for 20 minutes) prove to be the best treatment for reducing purple blotch pathogen. DISEASE MANAGEMENT/ONION AND GARLIC

central portion. These structures may be arranged in concentric rings. The affected leaves shrivel, droop down and finally withers. Bulbs are smaller in size; some may rot before harvest while others rot in store. Stemphylium leaf blight Management Cultural Methods ¢ Sanitation of field and collecting and burning of crop refuse reduces the disease incidence. ¢ Cultural control methods include long rotations with no-host crops. “Good field drainage and reduced plant density. «Hot water soaking of onion seed (50°C for 20 minutes) proved to be the best treatment for reducing the disease. Host Plant Resistance « Welsh onion (Allium fistulosum) lines are moderately resistant to Stemphylium leaf blight. Chemical Methods / . aN «Three to four sprays of 0.25% Mancozeb at 20 days iy : bd - J ey interval starting at 60 days after transplanting. Pl a “# * However, Mancozeb offers best control with higher Curling & abnormal elongation of leaves cost benefit ratio. * For seed production, fortnightly sprays of 0.025% Management Mancozeb or Iprodione is recommended. Cultural Methods * Sanitation and destruction and infected plant Colletotrichum Blight/Anthracnose / debris helps in reducing the disease. Twister Disease (Collectotrichum . . Host Plant Resistance gloeosporioides) Varieties like IPA 3, Belem, IPA 9, Franciscana IPA 10 and Symptoms Roxinha de Belem were found resistant. The characteristic symptoms are curling, twisting, chlorosis of the leaves, and abnormal elongation of Chemical Methods neck (false stem). Initially pale yellow water soakedoval * Application of Benomyl @ 0.02% as soil treatment sunken lesion appears on leaf blades, which increase is recommended. lengthwise covering the whole leaf. Numerous black“ Spraying of Mancozeb @ 0.25% also gives good coloured slightly raised structures are produced in the control of disease 

Downy Mildew (Peronospora destructor (Berk). Casp.) Symptoms The fungus causes both systemic and local infections. Plants raised form infected bulbs are showing systemic infection, which remain stunted, distorted and pale in colour. Local infection is caused by air borne conidia, which produce oval to cylindrical spots are violet to purple in colour. Affected leaves become pale green, fold over and collapse. Older leaves are attacked first and infection spreads to the sheath. Management Cultural Methods * Bulbs used for seed production should be selected from healthy field. Crop rotation for 3-4 years with no-host crop should be followed. * Infected crop debris and refuse heaps of onion culled from storage should be disposed properly. ¢« Late planting, poor drainage, higher doses of fertilizers and frequent irrigation should be avoided as these practices encourage high disease incidence. Host Plant Resistance * OnionlinesIC-48045, IC-32149,|C-49371 and DOP-2 i Ah have been reported resistant to downy mildew. Re UL Marl eaten ezeuieds Chemical Methods “Spraying of Mancozeb @ 0.25% and ziram @0.1% Management at 10-12 days interval is recommended. Cultural Methods « Bulb and seedling dip in Ridomil MZ @ 0.25% for “* Crop rotation for 4-5 years with non-host crop has 12 hours followed by 2 foliar sprays of the same been found effective in eliminating the disease. gives effective disease control. «Mixed cropping with tobacco and sorghum is effective in reducing the disease. Fusarium Basal Rot/Basal Plate Rot * Good drainage, deep ploughing in hot summer (Fusarium oxysporum fsp cepaae). and avoiding injury during cultural practices Symptoms reduces the disease incidence. Initially there is progressive yellowing and dying back from the tips of the leaves, the aerial part may die in 1-2 weeks or decay may extend over much longer period. When disease appears above the ground level, decay has already taken place at the base. The roots may turn pink and gradually decay until the entire root disappears. * Satisfactory control of basal rot can be achieved by flooding the soil in the non-growing season. Host Plant Resistance «Three lines viz. IIHR 141, IIHR 506 and Sel 13-1-1 consistently resistant to Fusarium oxysporium in the field in different growing seasons. DISEASE MANAGEMENT/ONION AND GARLIC

Biological Methods Management Trichoderma spp., Pseudomonas fluorescence and Cultural Methods Bacillus subtilis have been found effective against F. + Production should be confined to areas known to oxysporum under in vitro conditions. be free from disease. *« Combined seed treatment of T. viride +P + Crop rotation should be followed. fluorescence reduced onion basal rot incidence + When white rot incidence is low, infected plant both in pot and field conditions. may be destroyed and the soil around these plants should be treated. Chemical Methods « Hotwater treatment of bulbs at 49°C gives effective * Dipping onion sets in Benomyl, Carbendazim, control. Thiram and Difolatan @ 0.2% controls pink root, * Solarization of soil at high temperature i,e. 35°C for basal rot and neck rot of onion. 18 hours or 45°C for 6 hours reduces the disease * Spraying of Carbendazim @ 0.1% at 30, 20 and incidence by 50-70%. 10 days before harvest gave the lowest loss of Biological Method yield due to delay after 5 months of storage. lological Methods «Trichoderma viride, Glyocladium zeae, Coniothyrium minitans, Penicillium nigricans, Bacillus subtilis and White Rot (Sclerotium cepivorum Berk) T. harzianum have been reported as prominent Symptoms antagonists for control of white rot. Initial symptoms are yellowing and dying back of leaf tips. Roots are normally destroyed and there isa semi- Chemical Methods watery decay with abundance of superficial white * |!prodione (Rovral) @ 0.25% was found effective. fluffy mycelium. Brown or black sclerotia develop on Benomyl @ 0.1% was also reported to be good in the surface or within tissue. controlling the diseases. Pink Root (Phoma (Pyrenochaeta) terrestris, Fusarium solani) The disease occurs in onion grown for the first time and becomes increasingly damaging in successive crop particularly with short rotations. It is mainly a field disease and damaging effects are mainly on growing plants but losses also occur during transport and storage. Pink root often occurs in association with Fusarium basal rot. Symptoms The characteristic symptoms can be seen on the infected root. The affected roots turn yellow, shrived and die, meanwhile taking on a distinct pink colour. The new roots, which grow from the infected plants, get immediatley infected and become functionless. The disease is confirmed to the root only. The affected Sia, ‘hasta plants are commonly not killed but development of bulbs retarded. 

Black.mold.(Aspergillus.sp) Pink rot due to Phoma Disease Cycle: The pathogen persists in soil and is )\Vjanagement distributed on onion seedlings, sets and garlic cloves. Cultural Methods Dissemination also results form movement of spores, Storage of seed and bulb should be done after infested soil and plant residue by agricultural tools, proper drying. wind and surface irrigation or drainage water. * Bruising should be avoided when bulbs area is harvested, stored or transported. * Onion should be stored at 1-15°C. * The presence of calcium in onion tissue plays an important role in resistance to the disease. Management Host Resistance Allium fistulosum and some garlic lines are resistance to pink root. Varieties reported to be pink root resistance may not prove resistant in all situations. Chemical Methods ¢ Dusting of topped onion with Calcium Carbonate Cultural Methods reduced post harvest bulb rotting by 16 to 17%. Soil solarization reduce pink root incidence. It has During transit, black mold can be reduced if been observed that early sowing resulted in a higher the containers are fumigated with nitrogen disease incidence than late sowing. Long rotations tri chloride@430 mg / m3 with non-host crop should be followed. Bacterial Rots Chemical Methods i) Many workers have reported soil fumigation and use of fungicides but it is uneconomical at field level. After chemical control in field conditions pathogen population reduce early in the season but later returned to normal. Symptoms Brown Rot (Pseudomonas aeruginosa), ii) Soft Rot (Erwinia carotovora pv. carotovora (Jones) Bergey, and iii) Slippery Skin (Pseudomonas allicola) ; ; ; Bacterial pathogens are known to be associated Black Mold (Aspergillus niger Van Tieghem. with various types of rots in onion, which are usually A. fumigatus (green mold) and A alliaceus) observed during storage. Some are primary pathogens Symptoms and others secondary, following fungal, insect or The disease occurs in the region having high nematode attack. When the pathogen is of primary temperature ranging from 35°- 45°C. It causes post causal agent, it may damage the crop considerably. harvest blemishes and rotting of onion grown and _ Bacterial decay of onion is widely distributed in warm stored in hot climate. climate and cause severe problems. DISEASE MANAGEMENT/ONION AND GARLIC ys

Management * Grow the crop under optimum condition of tilth, fertilizer, drainage, crop rotation and freedom from weeds. * It is necessary to dry the crop quickly after harvest. «During rainy season, artificial curing is required. * Chemicals like Streptocycline were found somewhat effective in the control of bacterial diseases. Viral Diseases (transmitted by various aphid species or mechanically to onion) (i) Onion Yellow Dwarf Virus Sym ptoms Diamond shaped viral lesions The first symptoms appear on the youngest leaves, which turn pale and develop yellow streaks at the Management base of the leaves. Leaves may crinkle and flop over. Plant high quality transplants free from thrips and Symptoms are more pronounced on leaves that Iris yellow spot virus. Practice three year or longer develop from an infected bulb or transplant. Later rotation between onion crops. there is more pronounced yellowing and leavescrinkle, + Eliminate volunteers, culls, and weeds in and flatten, twist and fall to the ground. Flower stalks are around onion field. shortened, streaked with yellow and twisted. ¢ Sprinkler irrigation can provide some suppression of thrips and disease. Management « Avoid thin, patchy stands and crop stress. «No effective control measure is available. ¢ Thrips control may provide some reduction in * Plant virus free transplants and crop rotation of at iris yellow spot, but thrips control alone is not least three years should be followed. sufficient to economically control the disease. * Rouging of diseased plants and isolation from other susceptible crops or volunteer onions is advised. LEAFY VEGETABLES * Spraying of insecticides to control aphids Leaf Spots (Cercospora sp. and minimizes secondary spread. Aternaria sp.) Symptoms This is acommon problem of all the leafy vegetables. Symptoms appear as light brown, circular spots, surrounded by red margin. The red circular halo is not prominent in many vegetables except spinach. Disease is caused by Cercospora sp. Lettuce, celery and Chinese cabbage are affected by Alternaria sp. Symptoms are light brown and circular spots can be seen all over leaf lamina. (ii) Iris Yellow Spot Virus Symptoms It is caused by the tospovirus similar to Tomato Spotted Wilt Virus. Iris yellow spot symptoms first appear as straw-coloured, dry, tan, spindle or diamond-shaped lesions, with or without distinct green centers with yellow or tan borders on leaves. Symptoms vary greatly and are not always characteristic. 

Management * Cut the infected curds, leaves along with some healthy portion in morning and carefully collect in polythene to avoid falling of sclerotia in the field. Burn all these materials away from field. ¢ Main crop should be periodically observed near the stump region in cool, cloudy and moist weather for primary infection. «Foliar spray of Carbendazim @ 0.1% followed by spray of Mancozeb @ 0.25% along with sticker @ ee 0.1%. EESTI MNT ELS « Spray must cover stump and lower portion of leaves. Management «Avoid dense sowing of spinach. * Collect lower leaves and burn it. RADISH * Only one spray of Chlorothalonil @ 0.2%. Alternaria Blight (Alternaria raphani) ; Symptoms White Rot (Sclerotinia sclerotiroum) All foliar part is affected by the pathogen. Symptoms Symptoms appear as small circular dark, black spots on the leaves This disease is more common in cool and humid while irregular, oval to elongated lesions on siliqua and weather. Symptoms appear as water soaked rotting of inflorescence. Infected seeds also cause pre and post petioles, stump region and cover portion of the leaves. emergence seed rot after sowing. Pericarp of seed is Soon after infection, white mycelium is observed all severely infected by the pathogen. Cotyledons of seed over the infected portion. This mycelium develops are also infected resulting internally seed borne nature honeydew stage after colonization of the tissue. Later of the pathogen. Infected seeds act as a primary source on entire rotted lower portion and stump is converted of infection. into compact mycelial mat followed by hard black sclerotial body. This is the resting structure and source of primary inoculums. Leaf spot on radish Sclerotinia rot on celery DISEASE MANAGEMENT/RADISH

Sclerotinia carrot rot Infection on pod Management * Collect disease free-seed from healthy crop. * Seed treatment by captan @ 0.25%. «Pluck the infected lower leaves from main root crops in February and burn it . * One spray of Mancozeb @ 0.25% after breaking Management “Crop rotation with lowland paddy and other cereals. «Field sanitation by uprooting and burning of all infected plants and weeds. * Summer fallowing, ploughing accompanied with once irrigation followed by again ploughing in the leaves. ; . summer. One sPray of Mancozeb @ 0.25% during siliqua ¢ Green manuring in June and July followed by soil formation. application of Trichoderma @ 5 kg/ha soon after ploughing of the sunhemp. CARROT *« Seed treatment with Trichoderma @ 0.6 to 1% White Rot (Sclerotinia sclerotiorum) depending. Symptoms Disease appears as water soaked rotting of stalk, Collar Rot (Sclerotium rolfsii) stump and collar region engulfing lower portion ofthe °YMptoms leaves. Soon after infection, white mycelium growth is _ Initially wet and soft rotting of carrot root is observed. observed all over the infected portion. This mycelium Rooting covers entire root along with stump and is converted into compact mycelial mat. Later on leaves of the plant near collar region. Characteristic entire infected crown portion of carrot including symptoms observed as white, cottony, fungal growth some of the edible root converted into black, hardand 0” root. Gradually this hyphal mat is converted into large sclerotium. Sclerotia are the source of primary small, mustard like sclerotia that survive in the soil. inoculum and cause primary infection on flowers. Management ¢ Crop rotation with lowland paddy and other cereals. «Field sanitation by uprooting and burning of all infected plants and weeds. * Summer fallowing, ploughing accompanied with irrigation followed by again ploughing in summer. ¢ Green manuring in June and July followed by soil application of Trichoderma @ 5 kg/ ha soon after ploughing of the sunhemp. * Seed treatment with Trichoderma @ 0.6 to 1% Collar infection of sclerotinia depending 

portion of rhizome and base line stem. Rotting covers entire collar region of the rhizome that remain continue during storage also. Characteristic symptoms observed as white, cottony, fungal growth and sclerotia on affected portion as well as on contact soil. Gradually this hyphal mat is converted into small, mustard like sclerotia that survive in the soil. Management * Remove all the sclerotia from apical portion of rhizome during planting. * Crop rotation with lowland paddy and other ae cereals. so Se ee = < Field sanitation by uprooting and burning of all Sclerotium carrot rot . infected plants. ¢« Summer fallowing, ploughing accompanied Elephant Foot Yam with irrigation followed by again ploughing to Collar Rot (Sclerotium rolfsii) germinate and desiccate the soil borne sclerotial Symptoms inoculum. ¢ Green manuring in June and July followed by soil application of Trichoderma @ 5 kg/ha soon after ploughing of the sunhemp. « Rhizome dipping in Trichoderma @ 1% solution for 20 minutes. * Remove all the weeds from field. * Drenching of Trichoderma @ 1% suspension after 25 and 40 days of sowing. ¢ Drench Copper Oxychloride @ 0.3% followed by Carbendazim @ 0.1% in evening near the collar region for immediate control. Initially yellowing of the plant was observed and later on plant toppled down before maturity of rhizomes. Close observation revealed wet rotting of apical Toppling of foliage by collar rot DISEASE MANAGEMENT/Elephant Foot Yam



IMPORTANT VEGETABLE CROPS Tomato * Before transplanting dip the roots of seedlings for 15 minutes in Imidacloprid @ 0.3 ml/litre for management of aphids, white fly & leaf miner. * Transplant a row of marigold after every 16 rows of tomato as a trap crop. Marigold should be 15 days older than tomato plants so that they flower at the same time. Maximum egg laying by borer is observed on marigold flowers. First and last row of plots should be marigold and it should be sprayed with HaNPV. «Adopt wide spacing of 60 x 45 cm (for varieties) and 90x 60 cm (for hybrids) to reduce the chance of spread of diseases. * Apply neem cake @ 250 kg/ha at 20 DAP to reduce fruit borer, leaf miner and nematode. «Bird perches @ 10/ acre should be erected for facilitating field visits of predatory birds. * Spray of 5% NSKE at 15 DAP has also been found to be effective against leaf-miner & white fly. Spray Imidacloprid or Thiomethoxam at 15 DAP for leaf miner & white fly control, if needed. * Pheromone traps @ 5/ ha be installed for monitoring fruit borer activity. Replace the lures with fresh lures after every 20-25 day interval. ETL for fruit borer is 8 to10 moths /day/trap. * Monitor top three leaves for Helicoverpa eggs. «Release of T. chilonis, T. braziliensis and T. pretiosum @ 1.0 lakh/ha 4-5 times from flower initiation stage at weekly intervals for fruit borer. Nursery * Raise marigold (tall African variety golden age bearing yellow and orange flower) nursery 15-20 days before tomato nursery. * Prepare raised nursery beds about 10 cm above ground level for good drainage to avoid damping off. * Cover the beds with polythene sheet of 45 gauge (0.45 mm) thickness for three weeks before sowing for soil solarisation for reducing the soil borne pests. Sufficient moisture should be present in the soil. * Seed treatment with Trichoderma viride @ 4g/kg of seed in nursery to prevent infection of soil borne/ seed borne fungal 1 kg of FYM. Mix in 1m2. It can be applied even in main field. * Spray nursery with it if insect is noticed. * Spray Dithane M 45 or Ridomyl against Downy Mildew as this disease is generally seen in nursery. Main crop “Showing of resistant variety (Fruit borer-Avinash-2, Bacterial wilt- Arka Abha, Arka Alok, Shakti, Arka Abhijit, Arka Shreshta, Leaf Curl-Parbhani, Yeshree, H.24; Root-knot Nematodes, Hissar Anmol, SL 120, Pusa Hybrid 2; Powdery Mildew- Arka Ashish, Early Blight-Devgiri, Fusarium wilt-Pant Bahar).

- Spray HaNPV 250 LE/ha (2 x 10° POB) + 1% [ain crop jaggery along with sticker 0.5 ml/ liter 3 times = Bird perches @ 10/ acre should be erected for at 28, 35 and 42 DAP during evening to reduce facilitating field visits of predatory birds. borer damage. « Delta traps @ 2-3/ acre should be installed for ¢ Regular collection & destruction of damaged fruits hoppers, aphids and white fly, etc. i.e. clean cultivation helpsinmanagementofborer .. Give two to three sprays of 5 % NSKE against leaf effectively. hoppers, aphids and mites. Sprays of NSKE also «If the borer incidence crosses ETL (5% damage), brings down the borer incidence significantly. apply Emmamectin Benzoate (proclaim) or Neem oil (2%) application is also helpful in Indoxacarb. reducing borer infestation, though marginally. If « Rouge out and destroy leaf-curl and wilt affected incidence of leaf hopper and other sucking insect plants. pests is still above ETL, then apply Imidacloprid “Spray 0.02% Chlorothalonil/Mancozeb/Captan @ 17.8 SL @ 150 ml/ha. 1.25-1.5 kg a.i./ha in 700 L of water for the control. pheromone traps @ 5/ acre should be installed of early and late blight. Repeat after 10 days if for monitoring and mass trapping of shoot & fruit necessary. borer Leucinodes orbonalis. Replace the lures with «If red spider mite is noticed, spray neem soap or fresh lures after every 15-20 days. neem oil (0.1%) or any acaricide like Dicofol 18.5 » Release egg parasitoid T. chilonis @ 1.0 - 1.5 lakh/ EC (1.5 ml/I) or Ethion EC (1.5 ml/I) or Sulphur 80 ha for shoot & fruit borer, 4-5 times at weekly WP (39/\). interval. «Apply neem cake @ 250 kg/ ha (in two splits) in Brinjal soil along the plant rows at 25 and 60 days after Nursery transplanting and give light covering with soil. «Always prepare raised nursery beds about 10 cms This will be highly helpful in reducing nematodes above ground level for good drainage to avoid and borer damage. Don't apply neem cake when damping off, etc. there is heavy wind velocity or temperature is * Cover the nursery beds with polythene sheet of above 30°C. 45 gauge (0.45 mm) thicknesses for three weeks * Clipping of borer damaged shoots and collection & during June for soil solarisation which will help destruction of damaged fruits i.e. clean cultivation in reducing the soil borne insects, diseases like helps in management of borer and phomosis bacterial wilt and nematodes. However, care disease effectively. should be taken that sufficient moisture is present “* '!f the borer incidence crosses ETL (5% fruit in the soil for its solarisation. infestation), then apply Cypermethrin 25 EC @ 200 “Mix 250 gm of fungal antagonist Trichoderma viride g a.i/ha (0.005%) or Carbaryl 50 WP @ 3 g/litre of in 3.00 kg of FYM and leave for about seven days water. for enrichment of culture. After seven days mix in“ Continuous cropping of brinjal leads to more borer the nursery soil in a bed of 3 sq. meters. and wilt infestation. Therefore, crop rotation with * Seed of popular high yielding hybrid like F1- 321 non-solanaceous crops should be followed. be sown in beds in the first week of July and * Periodically collect and destroy the egg masses, properly mixed in soil for healthy nursery raising. larvae and adults of beetle. Before sowing, seed be treated with T. viride @ 4 * Rogue out the little leaf affected plants from time gm/ kg seed. Weeding should be done from time to time. Use of green manure, mulching with to time and infected seedlings should be rogued polythene, soil application with bleaching powder out from the nursery. will reduce the infection of bacterial wilt disease. 

Cabbage/Caullifl ower * Spray Bt (1 g/litre) if DBM 1.0/plant is noticed early Nursery or Spray NSKE 5% at primordia formation (18-25 DAP- head initiation stage - most critical stage). * Prepare raised nursery beds about 10 cm above g ge) . . . Repeat if DBM is > 1/plant at 10-15 days interval. ground level for good drainage to avoid damping . . . . . . Maximum of 3-4 NSKE sprays in one crop season off or raise seedlings in protrays in nursery under tas teas are required. When NSKE are sprayed, thorough net house conditions wherever such facility is . . available coverage of the entire plant surface is a must. * Rel itoid Trich i * Cover the beds with polythene sheet of 45 gauge hachge aoe 0 ee ha aoa 5-0. -4 ti Ww (0.45 mm) thickness for three weeks before sowing ¥ . gs . . interval. (optional for soil solarisation for reducing the soil borne ( pt ) . . . . ¢ For controlling Spodoptera mechanically collect pests. Sufficient moisture should be present in the soil and destroy gregarious young larvae and set up traps for mass trapping. However, to control * Seed treatment with Trichoderma viride @ 4g/kg of P trap . PP g . . . . . . . grown up caterpillar, do baiting with Methomyl in seed in nursery to prevent infection of soil borne/ seed borne fungal 1 kg of FYM. Mix in 1m? It can be ree grain /wheat grain (10 kg), jaggery (2 kg) and . . . insecticide formulation 250gm/ acre. applied even in main field. «Periodically remove and destroy disease affected * Spray nursery with Bt formulation (1ml or 1gm/I) ancy v ye at 10 days after sowin leaves. y 9 . . «If required, spray Chlorothalonil/Mancozeb for * Spray Dithane M 45 or Ridomyl against Downy . . . . ae . . Alternaria and Blitox + Streptomycin for black rot. Mildew as this disease is generally seen in Wider spacing (60 x 50 cm) will almost eliminate nursery. “Spray Indoxacarb 14.55 SC (0.5 ml/I) or Novbaluron any disease spread. (0.75 gm/I) or Quinalphos (1.5 ml/l) a day before , transplanting seedling to control stem borer and Okra (Lady Ss finger) early infestation of DMB. « Deep summer ploughing to expose resting stages of the pests Main crop « Sowing of YVMV resistant hybrids viz. Makhmali, « Sowing of resistant varieties (Downy Mildew-Stone Tulsi, Anupama-1 and Sun-40, etc. especially Head, Black rot-Puksa Drum Head, Pusa Mukta, K-1, during kharif season of the crop. Aphids-All season, Red Drum Head). “Grow maize/sorghum on borders as a barrier/trap crop for the entry of shoot & fruit borer adults. “Growing of two rows of mustard after every 25 rows * Set up yellow sticky and delta traps for white fly, of cabbage as a trap crop at the time of planting. This traps 80-90% of DBM population and other etc. pests. Mustard be sprayed with Dichlorovos 0.1% * Erection of bird perches @ 10/acre in the field for as soon as it germinates. (One row of mustard is facilitating bird predation. sown 15 days before cabbage plantingand second * Give two to three sprays of NSKE @ 5% alternating 25 days after planting of cabbage. Ensure that first with sprays of pesticides, if needed, for leaf hopper, and last row of plot are also mustard. white fly, mites and aphids, etc. Leaf hopper, if Adopt wide spacing of 60 x 45 cm to reduce the crosses ETL (5 hoppers/plant), spray Imidacloprid chance of spread of diseases. 17.8 SL @ 150 ml/ha. This will be effective in * Use light traps for adult DBM @3 traps/acre. Hang controlling other sucking pests as well. a bulb over a bucket of water. Within 3-4 days most * Install pheromone traps @ 2/ acre for monitoring of the adults get killed. of Earias vittella moth emergence. Replace the lures after every 15-20 day interval. RECOMMENDED IPM PRACTICES FOR IMPORTANT VEGETABLE CROPS /Cabbage/Cauliflower

- Release egg parasitoid like, Trichogramma chilonis ain crop @ 1-1.5 lakh/ ha starting from 30-35 days after . At the time of planting, dip the seedlings in sowing, 4-5 times at weekly interval for shoot & Pseudomonas fluorescens solution @ 5 ml/litre for fruit borer. two minutes. * Rogue out the YVMV affected plants, if any, from Erect bird perches @ 10/ acre for facilitating field time to time. visits of predatory birds. * Periodically remove and destroy the borer affected, |nstall delta sticky traps @ 2/acre for hoppers, shoots and fruits aphids and white fly, etc. * Need based application of chemical pesticides viz... Need based spray of commercial neem product/ Imidacloprid 17.8 SL @ 150 ml/ha or Propargite NSKE 5% against aphids, thrips, hoppers and white etc. 57EC @ 0.1 % for control of leaf hoppers, fly etc. Spray NSKE 5% 2-3 times against thrips at aphids, white flies, borers and mites. Shoot & fruit 15-20 days after transplanting (DAT) when rating borer, if crosses ETL (5.3 per cent damaged fruits), is between 1-2. This will reduce the population spray cypermethrin 25 EC @ 200 g a.i/ha (0.005%) substantially. If the population of thrips & white or Quinalphos 25 EC @ 0.05% or Emmamectin fly is still high, then spray Spinosad or Fipronil or Benzoate (proclaim) 5% (WDG) @ 0.25 g/litre or Imidacloprid @ 0.5 ml/l or Acephate @ 2ml/I. indoxacarb 14.5 SL @ 500 ml/ha * Spray vertimec for mites occurrence «Erection of pheromone traps @ 5/ha for Helicoverpa Chilli and Capsicum sp/ Spodoptera litura for monitoring of adults for Nursery egg laying. Prepare raised nursery beds about 10 cm above * Periodic releases of egg parasitoid, Trichogramma ground level for good drainage to avoid damping sp @ 1.5 lakh/ ha for fruit borer (Helicoverpa sp.) off, etc. “Spray of HaNPV 250 LE/ha 2-3 times at 60 DAP or * Cover the beds with polythene sheet of 45 gauge in initial stages or as and when needed. (0.45 mm) thickness for three weeks beforesowing * Spray of biopesticide like proclaim 5% (WDG) @ for soil solarisation which will help in reducing the 0.25 gm/litre or Spinosad @ 0.6 ml/L when larvae soil borne pests. Sufficient moisture should be are small. Apply these biopesticides preferably present in the soil for solarisation. during evenings. * Mix 150 gm of fungal antagonist 7. harzianum * Spray of chemical insecticides like indoxacarb 14.5 (cfu. 2 x 109/gm) in 3 kg of FYM and leave for SP @ 500 mi/ha or Fenvalerate @ 100 a.i /ha during about seven days for enrichment. After 7 days mix initiation of flowering to podding stage for fruit in the soil in a bed of 3 sq. m. borer, Helicoverpa sp is effective. Treat the seeds of popular hybrids with T. viride@ * Periodic removal and destruction of damaged 4 gm/kg. fruits due to borer or fruit rot. Destruction of crop * To avoid fungal diseases like damping off in residues/debris will reduce the carry over load nursery, drench soil with any copper fungicide like of many insect pests. After harvest crop will be copper oxy Chloride (Blue copper) @ 3 g/litre of immediately ploughed in the field. water during 2 or third week after sowing. * Rouging out and destroying of leaf-curl disease/ « Erect khaskhas shading/support on one side of mosaic complex affected plants periodically. nursery beds to avoid the exposure to cold/frost * Spray 0.02% Mancozeb/Captan for managing the during winter (December-January). Cover the leaf blight & fruit rot. Proper water management & beds with polythene sheets at night to avoid frost drainage reduce the incidence effectively. injury. However, remove the sheets during day * Adequate fertility & proper water management time to expose them to sun. will help develop the canopy of leaves & foliage Ey 

required to protect the fruit from sun scald. Male Annihilation Technique (MAT) Sometimes a shade crop like Dhaincha can also be 5 x 5 cm? wooden blocks soaked in solution of 6:4:1 grown as a border line. ethanol : methyl eugenol : malathion for 48 hours hung @ 10/ha Cucurbitaceous Crops Bait Application technique (BAT) * Collection and distruction of infected fruits/vines Spray liquid of 0.1% insecticide and 10% jaggery or * Deep ploughing of field after the crop harvest to 10% ripe banana at 200 spots/ha will the pupae. ¢ Earthing up of the soil around the vine to expose Onion/Garlic the pupae for desiccations and predation by birds. * Soil application of neem cake @ 250 kg/ha after germination and repeat once at flowering. ¢ Plant maize as a border crop seven days before sowing. * Management of leaf miner by i) removal of cotyledon leaves infected with leaf miner one week after germination ii) followed by spraying of neem seed powder extract @ 4% or neem soap @ 1% reduces the incidence of leaf miner. * Spray neem seed powder extract 4% or neem soap or pomgamia soap @ 1% or carbaryl @ 3gm/I or Indoxacarb 0.5 ml/I or Dimethoate 30 EC Sulphur @ 30 g/l after flowering at 10 days interval. «Crush pumpkin 1 kg and add 100 gm jaggery and 10 ml malathion and keep in the plot (4-6 places per acre). Adults are attracted to the fermenting pumpkin and lay eggs and get killed. Repeat the process 2-3 times in a cropping season. «Erect pheromone traps cuelure @ 3 traps / ac and change after 60 days. Pheromone application technique for the management of fruit fly in cucurbits *« Do seed treatment with thiram (2g/kg seed) to control seed and soil borne diseases in nursery. «Apply Trichoderma viridae@5 kg/ha mixed with FYM to main field as well as in nursery. * Surround the onion plots (at least 250 sq. m.) with two rows of maize planted 30 days before planting onion to block the thrips to enter onion plants. * Avoid planting onion during peak incidence of thrips. * Seedling root dip with Carbosulfan for 2 ha should be done before planting to protect the plants during initial stages whenever late planting is done. “Grow the crop on raised beds and provide proper drainage during kharif season to minimize disease incidence. «Thrips and foliar disease can effectively controlled by spraying Carbosulfan (2ml/l) +Carbendazim (2.5 g/l) + sticker (0.7 ml/I); Profenofos (1ml/I) +Mancozeb (2.5 g/l) +sticker (0.7 m/l); Cypermethrin (60 g ai/ha) + Chlorthaloni (2.5 g/l) + sticker (0.7 ml/l) in rotation. * Bulbing stage (45-75 days) is crucial for thrips management and needs chemical intervention. « Never use same pesticide repeatedly. RECOMMENDED IPM PRACTICES FOR IMPORTANT VEGETABLE CROPS /Cucurbitaceous Crops



» PROTECTED VEGETABLE CROPS Nature of damage due to different nematodes under « Treat the seeds with bio —pesticide-Pseudomonas polyhouse conditions is similar to the crops grown fluorescens @ 10 g/kg seed. under open conditions. Root-knot nematodes, Raise theseedling inthe coco-peat or any substrate Meloidogyne incognita, _reniform nematodes, by treating it P. fluorescens @ 1kg+ T. harzianum @ Rotylenchulus reniformis and lesion nematodes, 1kg + neem or pongamia cake @ 50 kg/ton. Pratylenchus sp. are the major nematodes attacking Treat the bed with neem or pongamia cake @ 50g horticultural corps under protected conditions. They T. harzianum @ 25 g or Pochonia chlamydosporia + feed on the roots devitalizing the plants ultimately Paecilomyces lilacinus @ 25 g/sq. m at an interval affecting both qualitative and quantitative production. of 2 months. All of them may be managed by following the + Apply 2 tons of farmyard manure enriched with integrated management as follows. bio-pesticide-Trichodrma harzianum per acre before planting, along with 100-200 kg of neem or Management pongamia cake. Ifthe beds are highly infested with the nematodes * Apply Carbofuran 3 G @ 1kg ai/ha at planting and bring down the population of nematodes by repeat after 45 days. applying neem/pongamia cake @ 500 g + Carbofuran @ 50 g/ sq.m.



BIO-AGENTS Use one kg of bio-pesticide-Trichoderma harzianum + «> Add water to the boiling solution to make 10 litres Paecilomyces lilacinus / Pochonia chlamydosporia / volume. Pseudomonas fluorescens + 50 kgofneemorpongamia «+ Cool and filter the decoction using a thin muslin cake to enrich 1 ton of farmyard manure and leave it cloth. under shade for 15 days. Once in 5 days, mix the FYM_ « Add soap @ 2 g/l and dilute to 80 to 100 litres for thoroughly by maintaining optimum moisture. spray. *« This preparation is effective against whitefly, Preparation of Biopesticides aphids, and leafhoppers. at farmers’ level Note: Tobacco decoction should not be used for more Neem Seed Kernel Extract (NSKE 4%) than once, as it is toxic to natural enemies. Method of preparation Cattle-dung and Urine Extract Dried neem seed kernels (400g) are grinded to Method of preparation coarse powder. « Mix Cattle-dung (5 kg) and urine (5 liters) * Take 40 g of this powder and tie it in a fine muslin thoroughly in 5 liters of water in a container and cloth, soak overnight in 400-500 ml of water in a allow this mixture for 4 days by keeping a lid over container. the container. « Shake and filter the suspension with waterto make <* After 4 days, filter and add 100 grams of lime to 1000 ml volume. this solution. « Add 2g of soap to this solution (NSKE 4%) anduse < Dilute the solution in 80 liters of water, which is for spray. sufficient for spraying an acre. « NSKE helps in the management of Spodoptera, Spraying cow dung urine solution prevents eggs Helicoverpa, semiloopers, leaf folders and sucking laying by the moth, e.g. Helivoerpa and Spodoptera, pests including mites. etc. * Itis found to give protection against some diseases Tobacco Decoction and the sprayed crop looks green and healthy. Method of preparation «Boil 1 kg tobacco dust in 10 liters of water for 30 minutes to attain coffee red colour.

Nuclear Polyhedrosis Virus (NPV) «Spray this solution during evening hours. Method of preparation “Insects Controlled: Helicoverpa, Spodoptera % Collect 400 NPV infected Helicoverpa or 200 * Virus of one insect species does not kill the other insect species. * Virus infected dead larvae are observed hanging head down from top branches 2-5 days after spraying the solution in the case of Helicoverpa Spodoptera larvae from field. ¢ Grind the collected larvae. Filter the solution obtained using a thin cloth. «Dilute the NPV solution to 100 litres and add 100g of Robin Blue to protect from UV light in the field. and split body in case of Spodoptera ra 

» PEST MANGEMENT «Always use protective clothing while spraying. Do's * Avoid spraying insecticides repeatedly. Alternate = Timely sowing them with botanicals, wherever possibletoprevent . Field sanitation development of resistance and pest resurgence. «Always use freshly prepared neem seed kernel « Add 0.5 ml of any sticking agent to the spray extract (NSKE). solution. « Apply pesticides only when required. * Oil should be made into an emulsion before spray = Wash okra & brinjal fruits before consumption. by shaking thoroughly in a bottle before dilution and sprayed immediately without any delay. Don'ts «Botanicals may cause phytoxicity when the , Don’t apply more than the recommended dose of temperature is more than 32 ° C in polyhouse. the pesticide Hence, it should be done with caution and only, Don't repeat the same pesticide consecutively. after pre-checking. It is always better to spray. pont apply mixture of pesticides botanicals in the evening. * Don't apply highly hazardous insecticides like «After spraying any insecticide keep appropriate _ : ’ ; monocrotophos in vegetables. waiting period before harvesting fruits. «Don't apply pesticides just before harvesting. * Don’t consume produce till 3-4 days after application of pesticide.



Occurrence of Fungal Diseases in Vegetable Crops Disease Pathogen Severity (%) | Average incidence (%) Brinjal Phomopsis blight Phomopsis vexans 10-70 32.5 White rot Sclerotinia sclerotiorum 5-22 8.7 Collar rot Sclerotium rolfsii 10-30 15.3 Leaf blight Alternaria alternata 5-35 25.2 Root rot Rhizoctonia solani 10-40 21.8 Rhizopus fruit rot Rhizopus stolonifer 2-12 5.2 Leaf spot Corynespora cassiicola 4-10 6.5 Wilt Fusarium solani 2-7 3.1 Myrothecium leaf Myrothecium roridum 2-16 24 spot Tomato Alternaria blight Alternaria solani, A. alternata 15-90 40.00 f.sp. lycopersici 5-30 15.2 Septoria leaf spot Septoria lycopersici 3-10 4.6 Late blight Phytophthora infestans 5-80 12.5 White rot Sclerotinia sclerotiorum 5-15 7.3 Collar rot Sclerotium rolfsii 10-40 19.6 Grey leaf spot Stemphillium solani 10-30 15.7 Fruit rot Rhizoctonia,Cladosporium, 5-20 15.2 Pythium Black leaf mold Pseudocercospora fuligena 0-3 1.4 Wilt F. oxysporum f.sp. lycopersici 2-8 3.2 Leaf spot Myrothecium roridum 5-12 6.5 Chilli/ Die-back Choanephora capsici, 15-60 35.4 Capsicum Colletotrichum capsici,

Disease Pathogen Severity (%) | Average incidence (%) Anthracnose Colletotrichum capsici 10-40 15.2 Phytophthora blight | Phytophthora capsici 5-20 6.9 Leaf blight & fruit rot | Alternaria alternata, Alternaria 5-20 13.7 solani Leaf spot Cercospora capsici 10-35 20.4 Collar rot Sclerotium rolfsii 2-5 3.4 White rot Rhizoctonia solani 1-4 2.2 Root rot Rhizoctonia solani 5-12 6.9 Myrothecium leaf Myrothecium roridum 0-3 1.4 spot Cucurbits Downy mildew Pseudoperonospora cubensis 10-80 35.8 Anthracnose Colletotrichum lagenarium 35-90 55.3 Cercospora leaf spot | Cercospora citrullina 20-50 32-60 Gummy stem/leaf Didymella bryoniae 5-20 12.5 blight Vine & Fruit rot Sclerotium, Rhizoctonia, 10-25 15.7 Phythium, Sclerotinia, Powdery mildew Sphaerotheca fuliginea, 15-45 18.7 Erysiphe cichoracearum Phytophthora blight | Phytophthora 25-60 35.5 cruentainnamomi Legume Leaf blight Pseudocercospora cruenta, 20-90 60.9 vegetables cruenta Ascochyta blight Ascochyta phaseolorun 5-15 8.5 Rhizoctonia solani 10-25 12.7 Ashy stem blight Macrophomina bataticola 5-30 15.3 Root rot Sclerotium rolfsii 5-15 9.2 Phoma leaf blight Phoma phaseolina 3-12 9.7 Rust Uromyces phaseoli 10-30 12.5 Powdery mildew Peronospora pisi 5-60 15.3 Downy mildew Peronospora pisi 5-60 15.3 White rot Sclerotinia sclerotiorum 10-35 25.1 Wilt F. solani f.sp. pisi 8-10 7.6 Leaf spot Myrothecium roridum 2-8 4.3 Cole crops Leaf spot Alternaria brassicae, A. 5-30 16.9 brassicicola Downy mildew Peronospora parasitica 5-25 10 White rot Sclerotinia sclerotiorum 5-15 8.7 Root rot/wire stem _| Rhizoctonia solani 10-25 12.5 

Disease Pathogen Severity (%) | Average incidence (%) Black leg Phoma lingam 2-5 2.2 Rootcrops | Leaf spot Alternaria raphani 15-60 30.8 Collar rot Sclerotium rolfsii 2-8 49 White rot Sclerotinia sclerotiorum 1-3 2.5 Leaf spot Cercospora dauci 2-5 2.1 Okra Leaf blight Cercospora abelmoschi, C. 25-85 60.4 hibisina Charcoal rot Macrophomina phaseolina 5-20 11.5 Leaf spot Myrothecium roridum 3-7 3.5 Onion/Garlic | Purple blotch Alternaria porri 15-70 43.8 Leaf blight Stemphyllium vesicarium 10-40 22.3 Downy mildew Peronospora destructor 5-25 8.6 Elephant Collar rot Sclerotium rolfsii 15-55 24.6 foot yam Leafy Leaf spot Cercospora sp. 10-25 14.9 vegetables Nursery Damping off Rhizoctonia, Phythium, 30-85 47.6 crops Phytophthora, Colletotrichum, Sclerotium, Phomopsis, Alternaria, Fusarium ANNEXURE-I/



Occurrence of Bacterial Diseases in Vegetable Crops DIES=F- EY) Pathogen Severity (%) Average incidence (%) Brinjal Wilt Ralstonia solanacearum 2-5 24 Tomato Leaf spot Xanthomonas campestris pv. 25-80 45.7 vesicatoria Leaf speck Pseudomonas syringae pv 15-70 25.3 syringae Wilt R. solanacearum 1-3 1.7 Soft rot Erwinia carotovora pv. carotovora 2-18 8.4 Chilli/Capsicum | Leaf spot X. campestris pv. vesicatoria 5-38 18.8 Soft rot E. carotovora pv. carotovora 2-10 4.9 Wilt R. solanacearum 3-8 3.6 Cowpea Common blight X. campestris pv. campestris 10-45 25.6 Halo blight P. syringae pv. phaseolicola 5-12 7.3 Cole crops Black rot X. campestris pv. campestris 10-60 21.7 Soft rot E. carotovora pv. carotovora 5-15 8.2 Cururbits Wilt E. tracheiphila 0-2 1.2 Root crops Soft rot E. carotovora pv. carotovora 5-10 5.5 Leafy Soft rot E. carotovora pv. carotovora 7-16 8.9 vegetables



Occurrence of Major Viral and Phytoplasmal Diseases of Vegetable crops Crop Disease Pathogen Severity (%) Average incidence (%) Brinjal Little leaf Phytoplasma 10-60 15.2 Mild mosaic Poty virus 4-10 8.6 Chilli Mottle mosaic Poty virus / CMV 5-20 8.3 Leaf curl Gemini 3-12 6.5 Little leaf Phytoplasma 1-2 <1 Tomato Leaf curlcomplex | Gemini, TMV,CMV | 30-80 65.2 Bottle gourd Mosaic Poty 5-35 9.5 Ash gourd Yellow vein mosaic | Gemini 20-65 20.3 Bitter gourd Leaf distortion Poty/ Gemini 15-60 35.7 Pumpkin Yellow mosaic Gemini 15-50 8.5 Ivy gourd Leaf distortion/ Poty 10-30 15.9 mosaic complex Okra Yellow vein mosaic | Gemini 30-90 42.5 Enation leaf curl Gemini 5-25 11.5 Cowpea Golden mosaic Gemini/Como 20-60 35.7



Fungicides/ Insecticides used for the Control of Vegetable Diseases/Pest Common name Trade name Dose Captan Captaf, Dhanutan 0.2-0.25 Thirum Hexathir, Thiride 0.2-0.25 Carbendazim Bavistin, Derosal, Dhanustin, 0.05-0.1 Thiophanate Methy! Topsin-M, Cercobi-M, Cover 0.05-0.1 Dinocap Karathane 0.1 Mancozeb Dithane M-45, Indofil M-45, 0.2-0.25 Dhanuka M-45 Zineb Dithane Z-78 0.2-0.25 Ziram Cuman-L 0.2-0.25 Copper Oxychloride Blitox-50, Fytolon, Blue copper, 0.3 Dhanucop Wettable Sulphur Sulfex, Dhanuksal, Kumulus 0.25-0.3 Tridemorph Calixin 0.05-0.1 Triademephon Baycor 0.05 Penconazole Topas 0.025-0.05 Propineb Antracol 0.2 Tebuconazole Folicur 0.05 Difenconazole Score 0.025-0.05 Bitertanol Bayleton 0.05 Hexaconazole Contaf 0.025-0.05 Flusilazole Punch 0.05 Triforine Saprol 0.05-0.1 Pencycuron Monceren 0.05-0.1 Copper Hydroxide Kocide 0.2-0.25 Propiconazole Tilt 0.025-0.05

New insecticides Common name Trade name(s) Formulation Recommended conc. Target pests (%) (ml or g/l) Abamectin Vertimec 1.8 EC 0.0009 0.5 Mites/thrips Acetamiprid Pride (for seed treatment) 20 SP 0.004 0.2 Sucking pests Beta Cyfluthrin | Bulldock 2.5 EC 0.0035 1.5 Bores Bt Halt(WP), Dipel(8L), 0.5 to 1.0 DBM Formulations Biobit (WP), Delfin (WG) Fenpropathrin | Danitol, 10 & 30 EC 0.045 1.5 Borers Meothrin Fipronil Regent 5 SC 0.01 2.0 Borers Imidacloprid Confidor, Sensor 17.8 SL 0.0045 0.25 Sucking pests Imidacloprid Stalone, Atom 200 SL 0.4 Sucking pests Indoxacarb Avaunt 14.5 SC 0.0145 1.0 Borers Methomy| Lannnate, Dunnet, Astra 40 SP 0.06 1.5 Borers Propargite Omite 57 EC 3.5 Chilli mites Spinosad Tracer 45 SC 0.018 0.4 DBM/borers Thiamethoxam | Actara 25 WG 0.0025 0.2 Seed treatment (for sucking pests) 

Biopesticides, Pheromones used in IPM Biopesticides/Pheromone Miele (Mat Vial Target pest 1. Azadirachtin (Neem based) Neemarin, Azadirachtin, | Caterpillars, leafhoppers, Multineem, Neemguard, — whiteflies, aphids Neemzol, margocide 2. Bacillus thuringiensis kurstaki (Bacteria) | Halt, Biolep, Delfin, Dipel, | Caterpillars Biovit, Thuricide 3. verticillium lecanii (Fungus) Dispel, Boverin, Biotrol, Caterpillars, white grubs 4. Beauveria bassiana (Fungus) Vertalec, Mycotal, Verticel | Aphids, thrips, whiteflies, scale insects 5. Nuclear Polyhedrosis Virus (H-NPV) H-NPV Helicoverpa armigera 6. Nuclear Polyhedrosis Virus (S-NPV) S-NPV Spodoptera litura 7. (Z) 11 Heaxadecanal & (Z) Hexadecanal __ Heli-lure Helicoverpa armigera (97:3) (Sex pheromone) 8. (Z, E), 911 Tetradecanyl Acetate & Spodo-lure Spodoptera litura (Z, E) 9,12-Dienyl Acetate (19:1) (Sex pheromone) 9. (E)-11 hexadecenyl Acetate & (E)- Nomate, Leucilure Leucinodes orbonalis 11-Hexadecen-1-01 (100:1) (Sex pheromone) 10. (Z)- Heaxadecanal -11-enal & (Z)- Nomate-DBM, Checkmate | Plutella xylostella hexzadec-11-enyl Acetate (Sex DBM Pheromone) 11. 4-(4-Hydroxyphenyl)-2-Butanone Cuelure Bactrocera cucurbitae Acetate (Sex pheromone)



Economic threshold level for some vegetable crop pests Crop Pest Economic Threshold Level (ETL) Cabbage Diamondback Moth (Plutella xylostella) 10 larvae (3rd & 4th instar) per plant in seedling stage Cauliflower Aphid 30 aphids/plant Chilli Mites (Poloyphagotarsonemus latus) Single mite per leaf Chilli Thrips (Thrips tabaci) 2 thrips per leaf Brinjal Whitefly (B. tabaci) 5-10 flies / leaf Brinjal Shoot and Fruit Borer (L. orbonalis) 0.5% shoot and fruit damage Tomato Fruit Borer (Helicoverpa armigera) 8 eggs in 15 plants or single larva per plant or 2% fruit infestation. Okra Fruit Borer (Earias vittella) 5.3 % of fruit infesttion Okra Leafhopper (Amrasca biguttula biguttula) 4-5 nymphs per plant Pea Aphids (Acyrthosiphon pisum) 3-4 aphids / stem tip Onion Thrips (Thrips tabaci) 13-14 thrips/ plant 15 days after transplanting.



List of Pesticides / Pesticides Formulations Banned in India A. Pesticides Banned for Manufacture, Import and Use (28 Nos.) 1. Aldrin 2. Benzene Hexachloride 3. Calcium Cyanide 4. Chlordane 5. Copper Acetoarsenite 6. Clbromochloropropane 7. Endrin 8. Ethyl Mercury Chloride 9. Ethyl Parathion 10. Heptachlor 11. Menazone 12. Nitrofen 13. Paraquat Dimethyl Sulphate 14. Pentachloro Nitrobenzene 15. Pentachlorophenol 16. Phenyl Mercury Acetate 17. Sodium Methane Arsonate 18. Tetradifon 19. Toxafen 20. Aldicarb 21. Chlorobenzilate

## 22. | Dieldrine 23. Maleic Hydrazide 24. Ethylene Dibromide 25. TCA (Trichloro acetic acid) 26. Metoxuron 27. Chlorofenvinphos 28. Lindane (Banned vide Gazette Notification No S.O. 637(E) Dated 25/03/2011)-Banned for Manufacture, Import or Formulate w.e.f. 25th March, 2011 and banned for use w.e.f. 25th March, 2013. B. Pesticides / Pesticide Formulations banned for Use but their manufacture is allowed for Export (2 Nos.) 29. Nicotin Sulfate 30. Captafol 80% Powder C. Pesticides formulations banned for Import, Manufacture and Use (4 Nos) 1. Methomyl 24% L 2. Methomyl 12.5% L 3. Phosphamidon 85% SL 4. Carbofuron 50% SP D. Pesticides Withdrawn (7 Nos) 1. Dalapon 2. Ferbam 3. Formothion 4. Nickel Chloride 5. Paradichlorobenzene (PDCB) 6. Simazine 7. Warfarin 



National Horticulture Mission Department of Agriculture & Cooperation Ministry of Agriculture Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi-110001