MAHARASHTRA Suggested cropping systems (based on testing under NPOF) 1. Rice-Groundnut 2. Rice-*Dolichos* bean 3. Rice-Cucumber 4. Rice-Red pumpkin Details of crops in cropping systems Rice (*Kharif*) Particulars Kharif Crop Rice Fortnight of sowing/planting Nursery Sowing-Second fortnight of JuneTransplanting- Second fortnight of July Fortnight of harvesting Second fortnight of October Varieties suitable for organic farming Karjat-3, Karjat-4, Karjat-7 and Palghar-1 Important features of suitable varieties Parameters Karjat-3 Karjat-4 Karjat-7 Palghar-1 Duration (days) 115-120 110-115 115-120 125-130 Average yield under organic condition (kg/ha) 3500 to 3700 3300 to 3500 3400 to 3600 3900 to 4100 Source (s) of availability RARS, Karjat RARS, Karjat RARS, Karjat RARS, Karjat Suitable regions/districts in the state Suitable for rainfed uplands as well as irrigated areas for *Kharif* and *Rabi* seasons in Maharashtra. Suitable for rainfed uplands as well as irrigated areas for *Kharif* and *Rabi* seasons in Konkan region of Maharashtra. Suitable for rainfed uplands and irrigated transplanted conditions in Maharashtra State. Konkan region and Maharashtra state Specific resistance/ tolerance to pest Tolerant to stem borer Moderately resistant to leaf folder Resistant to leaf folder, BPH, WBPH and moderately resistant to stem borer Moderately resistant to stem borer Specific resistance/ tolerance to disease Resistant to blast and moderately resistant to BLB and brown spots. Moderately resistant to blast and BLB Moderately resistant to blast Specific tolerance to drought/water logging Suitable for high rainfall zone Suitable for high rainfall zone Suitable for high rainfall zone Suitable for high rainfall zone Nursery raising practices Area of nursery required for 1 ha 0.10 ha (1000m2) Nursery raising method Wet nursery /Mat nursery/Raised bed method etc. Bed size (length x breadth in m) Length as per slope of the land (sloppy land less length, plane land more length) - Breadth- 1 m Seed sowing rate/m2 45 to 50 g/m2 Pre-sowing seed/soil treatment Materials Quantity/kg of seed or per m2 area Method of application Trichoderma 5g/kg of seed Seed treatment Source and optimum quantity of organic manures/other nutrient source/m2 of nursery Materials Quantity/m2 area Method of application FYM 3 kg/m2 area Soil incorporation before nursery sowing Irrigation practices Rainfed Weed management Mulching of *Glyricidia* green leaves and mannual hand weeding Organic plant protection practices Name of pest/ disease Recommended organic material used for control Quantity/m2 area Different insect pests Application of neem formulation 1500 ppm@5 ml/lit of water for two times Optimum age of nursery (days) 22 to 26 days **Field preparation:** Field is ploughed for solar heating in the month of May. Second ploughing and clod crushing is done before monsoon with wooden plough or tractor or power tiller drawn cultivator. Puddling is done by wooden plough or tractor or power tiller drawn puddler. Bullock drawn *Pankaj* puddler developed by Dr. Balasaheb Sawant Konkan Krishi Vidyapeeth, Dapoli should be used for better puddling. The field should be mannured with FYM and Neem cake @ 5 and 0.5 tonnes/ha, respectively before puddling. Similarly, 4.5 tonnes/ ha of *Glyricidia* green leaf and 4.2 tonnes/ha of rice straw be incorporated into puddled field prior to transplanting. Cultural practices Pre-sowing/planting treatment of seed/ seedlings Material Recommended rate (kg/ha or lit./ha) Method of application Phosphate solubilizing bacteria (PSB) and Azospirillum PSB 2.5 kg + Azospirillum 2.5 kg + 100 lit of water/ha Seedling root dip for 20 to 30 minutes in the slurry Spacing (Row x Plant) in cm 20x15cm Number of seedlings/hill 3-4 seedlings/hill Basal application of organic manures including soil application of bio-fertilizers, bio-control agents etc. Source Quantity/ha FYM 5000 kg /ha before puddling Neem cake 500 kg /ha before puddling Glyricidia Green leaves 4500 kg /ha soil incorporation before transplanting Rice straw 4200 kg /ha soil incorporation before transplanting Top dressing of organic manures Source Quantity/ha Days after sowing/ planting or stage of crop 1. Cow urine 50 lit/ha Spraying at 30 and 60 2. Vermiwash 50 lit/ha days after transplanting Irrigation practices Rainfed during Kharif and canal irrigation during Rabi Major weeds Echinochloa crusgalli (Phakhad), Echinochloa colonum (Phakhad), Cyperus iria (Lavala), Cyperus rotundus (Lavala) and Ischane globossa (Dhur) Weed management Critical stageof weeding Recommended practice for organiccondition 20 Days after transplanting Cono- weeder hoeing 30 Days after transplanting(Tillering) Cono- weeder hoeing and manualhand weeding 60 Days after transplanting(Panicle initiation) Manual hand weeding Organic plant protectionpractices Name of the pest/disease Organic materialrecommended for control Insect pests Stem borer * Ploughing and collection of stubblesand their composting after harvestingof rice.* Use of tolerant and resistantvarieties.* Crop rotation with ground nut,*Dolichos* bean, cucumber and redpumpkin.* Harvesting of rice close to the groundwith *Vibhav* sickle developed byDBSKKV; Dapoli to kill the hibernatinglarvae.* Use of pheromone traps @20 Nos./ha* Release of *Trichogramma* @ 50000/ha for 4 times.* Collection of egg masses and theirdestruction.* Conservation and preservation offrogs in the field Case worm * Timely transplanting* Intermittent draining out water fromthe field* Flooding the field followed bydragging a rope across the field anddraining out the water from the field Brown PlantHoppers (BPH), WhiteBacked Plant Hoppers(WBPH) and Blue beetle * Use of tolerant and resistantvarieties.* Intermittent draining out water fromthe field Army worm * Judicious use of nitrogenous fertilizers. Army worm * Adoption of proper spacing (20x15cm) Army worm * Formation of alley ways for every three meters for penetration of sunlight and proper aeration Army worm * Deep ploughing after harvesting of crop to expose the hibernating stages of pest. Army worm * Everyday inspection of the field during dry spell and at maturity. Army worm * Keeping the bunds clean and free of weed in the beginning of the season. Army worm * Digging the trench and flooding it with water for preventing migration of larvae from one field to another field. Army worm * Erection of bird perches. Army worm * Harvesting the crop immediately after it attains the maturity. Army worm * Conservation and preservation of frogs in the field. Leaf eating caterpillars * Erection of bird perches. Diseases Blast and sheath rot * Use of tolerant and resistant varieties. Diseases Blast and sheath rot * Spraying of *Pseudomonas fluroscence* @ 8-10 g / lit of water [for 2-3 times] starting from maximum tillering to flowering stage. Diseases Bacterial leaf blight * Use of tolerant and resistant varieties. Diseases Bacterial leaf blight * Intermittent draining out water from the field. Diseases Bacterial leaf blight * Judicious use of nitrogenous fertilizers. Diseases Bacterial leaf blight * Adoption of proper spacing (20x15cm) Groundnut (*Rabi*) Important features of suitable varieties: SB XI, Konkan Guarav and Konkan Trombay Tapora Parameters SB-XI Konkan Guarav Konkan Trombay Tapora Duration (days) 110-115 120-125 120-125 Average yield under organic condition (kg/ha) 1200 to 1500 1800 to 2000 1900 to 2100 Source (s) of availability RARS, Karjat RARS, Karjat RARS, Karjat Suitable regions/ districts in the state Maharashtra state Konkan region of Maharashtra Konkan region of Maharashtra Specific resistance/ tolerance to disease Tolerant to *tikka* (leaf spot) and rust Tolerant to *tikka* (leaf spot) and rust Tolerant to *tikka* (leaf spot) and rust **Field preparation:** Plough the field after harvest of *Kharif* rice. Criss-cross cultivation and clod crushing with peg tooth cultivator to bring the soil into good tilth. Cultural practices Seed rate (kg/ha) SB XI- 95 kg kernels/ha, Konkan Guarav- 110 kg kernels /ha, Konkan Trombay Tapora- 125 kg kernels/ha Pre-sowing/planting treatment of seed/seedlings Material Recommended rate (kg/ha or lit./ha) Method of application Trichoderma 5g/kg of seed Seed treatment Rhizobium strain 25g/ kg of seed Seed treatment PSB 25g/ kg of seed Seed treatment Spacing (Row x Plant) in cm 30x15cm Basal application of organic manures including soil application of bio-fertilizers, bio-control agents etc. Source Quantity/ha FYM 1500 kg/ha Neem cake 160 kg/ha Vermicompost 560 kg/ha Top dressing of organic manures Source Quantity/ha Days after sowing/ planting or stage of crop 1. Cow urine 50 lit/ha Spraying at 30 and60 days after sowing 2. Vermiwash 50 lit/ha Irrigation practices Number of irrigation Most critical stage of irrigation Depth of irrigation (cm) 10 irrigations at an interval of 10-12 days Branching, Flowering, Pegging, Pod formation and Pod filling 60 cm (6 cm/ irrigation) Major weeds Physalis minima (Ranpopati), Portulaca oleracea (Motha ghol), Alternanthera sessilis (Reshimkata), Blumea lacera (Bhamrud) and Amaranthus viridis (Ranti math) Weed management Critical stage of weeding Recommended practice for organic condition 20 DAS Dry land weeder Flowering Manual weeding at the time of earthing up. Organic plant protection practices Name of the pest/ disease Organic material recommended for control Quantity (kg or liters/ha) Insect pests Aphids • Application of neemicide 3ml/lit Tikka (leaf spot) • Use of tolerant and resistant varieties. Rust • Use of tolerant and resistant varieties.• Judicious use of irrigation.• Timely harvesting. Optimum stage of harvesting • General yellowing of crop.• Blackening of inside portion of shell.• Development of ridges on pod• Colour development of kernel as per varietal character. Yield Parameters 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 Mean Economic yield (kg/ha) 1671 3395 3648 2881 2584 2546 1876 2657 Dolichos bean (*Rabi*) Particulars Rabi Crop Dolichos bean Fortnight of sowing/planting Sowing - Second fortnight of December Fortnight of harvesting First fortnight of February to second fortnight of March Varieties suitable for organic farming Konkan Bhushan Important features of suitable varieties: Konkan Bhushan Parameters Variety : Konkan Bhushan Duration (days) 100 days Average yield under organic condition (kg/ha) 5000-5200 green pods kg/ha Source (s) of availability RARS, Karjat Suitable regions/districts in the state Maharashtra state Specific resistance/tolerance to disease Resistant to yellow mosaic virus Special character Dwarf, Does not require support **Field preparation:** Plough the field after harvest of *Kharif* rice. Criss-cross cultivation and clod crushing with peg tooth cultivator to bring the soil into good tilth. Cultural practices Seed rate (kg/ha) 25kg/ha Pre-sowing/planting treatment of seed/seedlings Material Recommended rate (kg/ha or lit./ha) Method of application Trichoderma 5g/kg of seed Seed treatment Rhizobium strain 25g/ kg of seed Seed treatment PSB 25g/ kg of seed Seed treatment Spacing (Row x Plant) in cm 45 x 15 cm Basal application of organic manures including soil application of bio-fertilizers, Source Quantity/ha FYM 4000 kg/ha Neem cake 390 kg/ha bio-control agents etc. Vermicompost 1330 kg/ha Top dressing of organic manures Source Quantity/ha Days after sowing/ planting or stage of crop 1. Cow urine 50 lit/ha Spraying at 30 and 2. Vermiwash 50 lit/ha 60 days after sowing Irrigation practices Number of irrigation Most critical stage of irrigation Depth of irrigation (cm) 9 irrigations Branching, Flowering and Pod formation 54 cm (6 cm/ irrigation) Major weeds Physalis minima (Ranpopati), Portulaca oleracea (Motha ghol), Alternanthera sessilis (Reshimkata), Blumea lacera (Bhamrud) and Amaranthus viridis (Ranti math) Weed management Critical stage of weeding Recommended practice for organic condition 25-40 DAS Dry land weeder, One hand weeding Organic plant protection practices Name of the pest/ disease Organic material recommended for control Quantity (kg or liters/ha) Insect pests Aphids * Application of neemicide 3ml/lit Pod borer * Application of neemicide 3ml/lit Diseases Powdery mildew * Use of resistant and tolerant varieties. Optimum stage of harvesting Picking for green pods from 60 to 100 days after sowing Yield Parameters 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 Mean Economic yield (kg/ha) 5024 2998 3017 1904 4949 5627 4974 4070 Cucumber (*Rabi*) Particulars Rabi Crop Cucumber Fortnight of sowing/planting Sowing – First fortnight of January Fortnight of harvesting First fortnight of March to first fortnight of April Varieties suitable for organic farming Hemangi and Sheetal Important features of suitable varieties: Hemangi and Sheetal Parameters Variety Hemangi Sheetal Duration (days) 100-110 95-105 Average yield under organic condition (kg/ha) 11500-12000 12000-12500 Source (s) of availability Government/private agencies DBSKKV, Dapoli Suitable regions/districts in the state Maharashtra state Maharashtra state Specific resistance/tolerance to disease Tolerant to powdery mildew and downy mildew **Field preparation:** Ploughing the field after harvest of *Kharif* rice. Criss-cross cultivation and clod crushing with peg tooth cultivator to bring the soil into good tilth. Cultural practices Seed rate (kg/ha) 2.75 kg/ha Pre-sowing/planting treatment of seed/seedlings Material Recommended rate (kg/ha or lit./ha) Method of application Trichoderma 5g/kg of seed Seed treatment PSB 25g/ kg of seed Seed treatment Spacing (Row x Plant) in cm 1.5 x 0.9 m Basal application of organic manures including soil application of bio-fertilizers, bio-control agents etc. Source Quantity/ha FYM 9000 kg/ha Neem cake 870 kg/ha Vermicompost 3000 kg/ha Irrigation practices Number of irrigation Most critical stage of irrigation Depth of irrigation (cm) 12 irrigations 12 irrigations at an interval of 7-8 days 72 cm (6 cm/ irrigation) Major weeds Physalis minima (Ranpopati), Portulaca oleracea (Motha ghol), Alternanthera sessilis (Reshimkata), Blumea lacera (Bhamrud) and Amaranthus viridis(Ranti math) Weed management Critical stage of weeding Recommended practice for organic condition 30-60 DAS Hand weeding Organic plant protection practices Name of the pest/disease Organic material recommended for control Quantity (kg or liters/ha) Insect pests Red pumpkin beetle • Application of neemicide. 3ml/lit Fruit fly • Erection of Rakshak pheromone trap designed by Dr. BSKKV, Dapoli 4 Nos. /ha Diseases Powdery and Downey mildew • Growing tolerant and resistant varieties.• Crop rotation. Optimum stage of harvesting (in case of vegetables and green cob) • 60-100 DAS. Yield Parameters 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 Mean Economic yield (kg/ha) 6044 8507 5509 5919 11357 12537 8312 Red pumpkin Particulars Rabi Crop Red pumpkin Fortnight of sowing/planting Sowing – First fortnight of January Fortnight of harvesting First fortnight of April Varieties suitable for organic farming MPH-1 Important features of suitable varieties: MPH-1 Parameters Variety :MPH-1 Duration (days) 95-100 Average yield under organic condition (kg/ha) 12500-13000 kg/ha Source (s) of availability RARS, Karjat Suitable regions/districts in the state Maharashtra state Specific resistance/tolerance to disease Tolerant to powdery mildew and downy mildew **Field preparation:** Ploughing the field after harvest of *Kharif* rice. Criss-cross cultivation and clod crushing with peg tooth cultivator to bring the soil into good tilth. Cultural practices Seed rate (kg/ha) 6.5 kg/ha Pre-sowing/planting treatment of seed/seedlings Material Recommended rate (kg/ha or lit./ha) Method of application Trichoderma 5g/kg of seed Seed treatment PSB 25g/ kg of seed Seed treatment Spacing (Row x Plant) in cm 1.5 x 0.9 m Basal application of organic manures including soil application of bio-fertilizers, bio-control agents etc. Source Quantity/ha FYM 6670 kg/ha Neem cake 650 kg/ha Vermicompost 2230 kg/ha Irrigation practices Number of irrigation Most critical stage of irrigation Depth of irrigation (cm) 10 irrigations 10 irrigations at an interval of 10 days 60 cm (6 cm/ irrigation) Major weeds Physalis minima (Ranpopati), Portulaca oleracea (Motha ghol),Alternanthera sessilis (Reshimkata), Blumea lacera (Bhamrud) andAmaranthus viridis (Ranti math) Weed management Critical stage of weeding Recommended practice for organic condition 30-60 DAS Hand weeding Organic plant protection practices Name of the pest/ disease Organic material recommended for control Quantity (kg or liters/ha) Insect pests Red pumpkin beetle • Spraying of neemicide 3ml/lit Fruit fly • Erection of Rakshak pheromone trap designed by DR. B.S.K.K.V. Dapoli. 4 Nos. / ha Diseases Powdery mildew and downy mildew • Follow crop rotation.• Maintain field sanitation. Optimum stage of harvesting • 90 – 100 DAS Yield Parameters 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 Mean Economic yield (kg/ha) 17421 3369 11024 8450 12561 12726 10925