Maharashtra NRCS Cover Crop Planning Manual 1.0 October 2015 Part I. Introduction & Purpose The overall purpose of this Technical Note is to help NRCS planners, clients, and partners implement the Maharashtra NRCS 340 Cover Crop Practice Standard. The specific objectives of this Technical Note are: 1. To explain the concept of cover crop "functional groups" for categorizing cover crop choices and to convey related planning considerations (Part II). 2. To explain the concept of cover crop "seasonal niches" for further categorizing and narrowing down cover crop choices (Part III). 3. To provide lists of recommended cover crop species for each seasonal niche, plus brief descriptions of each species (Part IV). 4. To provide establishment specifications (seeding rate, date, depth, etc.) for each recommended species and niche (Part IV). 5. To provide guidance on a range of associated cover crop planning issues, including timing of cover crop termination (Part IV). Part II. Cover Crop Functional Groups Introduction to Cover Crop Functional Groups A first step in narrowing down cover crop choices is dividing cover crops into functional groups – broad categories of species with similar characteristics. This document divides cover crops into the following three groups: grasses, legumes, and non-legume broadleaf species. Non-legume broadleaf species are then further split into brassicas and forbs. Start your cover crop planning by selecting functional groups. This usually helps sharpen your focus on the cover crop's core purpose, without being distracted by the many details associated with species selection. Once functional groups have been considered, then species can be chosen from within each desired group. The paragraphs below summarize the characteristics of each functional group. Keep in mind that for each broad generalization made below about a particular functional group, there is usually at least one cover crop species within the group that is an exception to that generalization. If a particular species has one more characteristics that is unusual for its functional group, that fact will likely be noted in the description for that crop in Part IV. Functional Group Descriptions Grass Functional Group Grass cover crops include many species traditionally grown for grain (wheat, barley, etc.) and others commonly grazed or harvested for forage (annual ryegrass, sorghum-sudangrass, etc.). Grass cover crop options also include perennial forages such as tall fescue and orchardgrass. Grasses are not able to "fix" or take nitrogen (N) directly from the air for their nutrition. Thus, grasses require an ample supply of soil N for fast growth and high yield. Consequently, grass cover crops tend to be very good scavengers of soluble soil N. Grasses typically produce more above-ground biomass than either legumes or broadleaf species. Grass residues also tend to be more resistant to decay and are longer-lasting than legume or broadleaf residues. Therefore, grasses are generally the best choice for producing large amounts of organic matter and lasting ground cover. Most grasses grow relatively quickly. They also tend to have extensive, fibrous (net-like) rooting systems that help knit together surface soil. Grass cover crops can send roots very deep into the soil to help fight compaction, but the hair-like nature of most grass roots means the diameter of pores they leave behind are relatively small. Some grasses have been shown to suppress weeds through alleleopathy as well as through competition for light and nutrients. Alleleopathy refers to release of chemicals that are antagonistic to germination or growth of other plants. Grasses generally offer the broadest range of seeding date options among the functional groups, especially in the fall. This means that when practical constraints require late seeding, grasses are sometimes the only available cover crop choice. All of the above characteristics help explain why grasses have traditionally been and continue to be the functional group of choice for many core cover crop purposes such as erosion prevention, building soil organic matter, scavenging N, and out-competing weeds. Grass cover crops generally contain relatively high levels of carbon (C) compared to nitrogen (N) (i.e., they have a high C:N ratio). This helps explain why they are more slowly digested by soil microbes and why grass residues tend to be longer-lasting. This tendency for grass residues to have high C:N ratios and to break down slowly is linked to how mature the grass was at the time of termination. Residues of young, vegetative grass plants have low C:N ratios and are similar to spring-time lawn clippings. Once grasses begin their reproductive phase, their carbon content and C:N ratio begin to climb quickly and residues are more similar to straw. This means grass residues become progressively more resistant to breakdown as the plants mature. The high C:N ratios in reproductive-stage grass residues can have potentially very important implications for N supply to subsequent crops. This key cover crop planning issue is explained in the section below on C:N ratios. Grass cover crops are generally wind- or self-pollinated, meaning species in this group are typically not top choices for improving pollinators. However, some cover crop grasses are useful for building beneficial insect habitat. Many grass cover crop species make excellent forage if grazed or harvested at the right stage of maturity. Despite these broad similarities among grass cover crops, individual species within the group can have very different characteristics. For example, grass cover crops include cool-season annuals such as cereal rye, warm-season annuals such as pearl millet, and cool-season perennials such as tall fescue. Warm-season perennial grasses such as bermudagrass are not usually recommended as cover crops in Maharashtra, because they are slow to establish and have a relatively long winter dormant period. Neither characteristic is desirable for typical cover cropping purposes. Legume Functional Group Legume cover crops are broadleaf plants, including some traditionally harvested for seed (e.g., soybean, cowpea) and others often grown for forage (e.g., hairy vetch, red clover). The key distinguishing characteristic of legumes is their ability to "fix" or utilize atmospheric nitrogen (N). Although legumes have many useful characteristics, this N fixation ability is typically the single most important reason for using them as cover crops. Legumes fix N through a mutually beneficial association with Rhizobium bacteria in the soil. When the proper bacteria and conditions exist in the soil, nodules form on legume roots indicating that N fixation is taking place. Legume seeds can be inoculated with the appropriate bacteria prior to planting to increase the probability of successful N fixation. Different legume species may require different rhizobium bacteria, so the same inoculant will not work for all legumes. However, almost every legume species will "cross-inoculate" with at least one other legume species. Matching legumes to the proper inoculant can be confusing, so when planning always consult a good reference on legume inoculants. If the recommended Rhizobium bacteria is already present in the soil, then legume seed inoculation prior to planting may not be necessary. If the field's recent cropping history includes successfully growing the legume or a "cross-inoculating" species, this generally indicates that the necessary bacteria are already present. Given that N fixation is almost always a high priority when growing legume covers, inoculating legume seed prior to planting is still recommended in every case as a form of cheap insurance. In almost all cases, legumes take some of the N they need to build their tissues from the soil and some from the atmosphere. When soil N supply is low, legumes can fix large amounts of atmospheric N. When N is readily available in the soil, legumes will preferentially use soil N rather than fix atmospheric N. So legumes can take up soil N, but they are generally the least effective cover crop functional group for N scavenging. When legume residues return to the soil and are broken down through microbial action, the N in those residues – including the N originating from the atmosphere – is released and becomes potentially available for use by other plants. In this way, legumes can transfer significant amounts of N from the air to the soil and thereby increase the supply of N available for subsequent crops. The amount of N fixed and/or taken up by legumes is proportional to the amount of legume biomass produced. A traditional recommendation for maximizing legume cover crop N fixation and supply to subsequent crops is to terminate at early to mid-bloom. Flowering in this case serves as an indicator that maximum biomass has been achieved. Flowering is not necessary for N fixation – as stated above, the process is associated above all with biomass production. Unless reseeding is desired, terminating legume cover crops prior to seed formation is important both to prevent N from being tied up in the seed and to minimize future weed concerns. Legume residues at all stages of maturity tend to have low carbon to nitrogen (C:N) ratios. Thus, all legume residues, including those from plants in the early to mid-reproductive stage, can be relatively easily digested and recycled by soil microbes. This means legume residues tend to disappear quickly from the soil surface and not provide long-lasting cover. This also means the nutrients in legume residues, including potentially high levels of N, tend to be quickly released into the soil. Cover crop legumes tend to be relatively slow to establish compared to grasses and broadleaf species. In general, they produce less total biomass than the other two functional groups. In addition, legumes are not generally recognized for suppressing weeds through alleleopathy. Thus, legume cover crops tend to be less competitive against weeds or other species in a mix than grass or non-legume broadleaf species. Soil N levels influence the competitiveness of legumes. If soil N supply is high, legumes are less competitive with grasses and non-legumes. If soil N supply is low, legumes tend to be much more competitive. Legume species tend to require earlier planting dates that grasses and more time to achieve their core purposes than brassicas or grasses. Therefore, legumes are often a poor fit when the growing window for cover crops is relatively short. All of the above characteristics help explain why legumes are generally the least effective cover crop functional group for providing lasting ground cover, preventing erosion, building soil organic matter, and competing with weeds. Legume cover crop species generally have taproots with moderate potential for creating macropores in compacted soil. Notable exceptions include some biennial and perennial legumes like alfalfa and yellow blossom sweet clover, which are top subsoilers if they can grow for adequate periods of time. The legume cover crop group includes many species with blooms attractive to both pollinators and people. Some also have extra-floral nectaries (nectar sources on plant parts other than flowers) that are highly attractive to beneficial insects. Most legume cover crop species make high quality forage. Despite these general similarities, individual legume species can have very different characteristics. Legume cover crop choices includes warm season annuals (soybeans, cowpeas, etc.), cool-season annuals (hairy vetch, crimson clover, etc.), and a very important group of biennial or perennial species (red clover, white clover, etc.). Non-Legume Broadleaf Functional Group The distinguishing characteristic of this group of cover crops is that they are broadleaf (dicotyledons) like legumes, but they are similar to grasses in that they do not fix atmospheric N. Non-legume broadleaf cover crops can be further subdivided into two subgroups: brassicas and forbs. Brassicas The brassica cover crop subcategory includes forage radish, mustard, rapeseed, and forage turnip. These crops have explosive growth potential, especially in the mild conditions of late summer through mid-fall in Maharashtra. Brassicas need lots of soil N to fuel their rapid growth and generally have deep root systems, so they can be excellent N scavengers. Forage radish and rapeseed in particular are known for their fast-growing, cylindrical taproots that can "biodrill" four or more feet down in a short-time and produce impressive macropores. Not all brassicas have this subsoiling potential; for example, some mustard cultivars are reported to have fibrous root systems. Brassicas tend to be intermediate between grasses and legumes with respect to C:N ratio of residues and the digestibility of those residues by soil microbes. Thus, residues of brassicas generally break down and release nutrients faster than residues of grasses, but slower than legumes (assuming all were terminated near maturity). The brassica group therefore tends to be intermediate between grasses and legumes in terms of its potential to fulfill traditional cover crop purposes like providing ground cover, preventing erosion, and building soil organic matter. Brassicas are excellent at suppressing weeds because of their very fast growth rate. Some like radish also have strong alleleopathic properties that can temporarily suppress weed seed germination even after their residues have disappeared. All brassicas contain and can release chemical compounds that may be toxic to a broad range of soil organisms, including plant-pathogenic fungi, nematodes, and weeds. Brassica "biofumigation" has been used as a substitute for chemical soil fumigation ahead of a wide range of high-value crops, with varying levels of success. Mustards have the highest biofumigant potential and some cultivars have been developed specifically for that purpose. The biotoxic compounds in brassicas are high in sulfur (S). This helps explain why brassicas require more S than many other plant species. It is important to understand that maximizing the brassica soil biofumigant effect requires very purposeful management, including careful timing of cover crop termination, mowing the cover to rupture plant cells and release bio-toxic compounds, and incorporation of the mowed residue into the soil with tillage. Simply growing a brassica cover crop will not likely produce the same biofumigant effect, although well-planned rotation to brassicas may help break cycles of particular pests. The key point is that brassicas are not silver a bullet for eliminating problems with plant-parasitic nematodes or other soil pests (see below for more on pest suppression with cover crops). Some varieties of brassicas like forage radish and mustard grown in Maharashtra appear to have a strong photoperiod response. When planted in the late summer or fall as day length decreases, they put on lots of vegetative growth and do not bolt or go to flower When planted in the spring as day length increases, they produce much less biomass and go to flower quickly. Flowering brassicas like rapeseed or mustard can produce beautiful fields of yellow flowers that are attractive to pollinators. Some brassicas can provide excellent grazing for livestock and a range of brassica hybrids and cultivars are marketed for this purpose. Within the brassica subgroup, there can be significant especially strong variability in characteristics between cultivars of the same plant species. Forbs The forb subgroup is a catch-all category for non-legume, non-brassica broadleaf cover crop species with many differing characteristics. The forbs recommended in this document are buckwheat, black oilseed sunflower, and phacelia. Like brassicas, these forb cover crops do not fix atmospheric N and need ample soil N to thrive. However, they do not generally have the deep roots or very fast growth rate of brassicas. Therefore, the forb subgroup has much lower N scavenging potential. The C:N ratio and durability of forb residues vary. Buckwheat and phacelia residues tend to disappear quickly; mature sunflower residues can be longer-lasting. All three forbs are similar in that they produce blooms very attractive to pollinators and beneficial insects. Another similarity is that none of these crops is traditionally used for livestock forage in Maharashtra. Buckwheat and sunflower are summer annuals. Phacelia grows best under mild conditions in the fall and spring in Maharashtra and is generally not expected to overwinter. Functional Group Selection: C:N Ratio Considerations Cover crop C:N ratio refers to the ratio of carbon (C) to nitrogen (N) in cover crop biomass. The cover crop C:N ratio controls two very important factors: 1. How quickly cover crop residues will decompose. 2. If and how quickly N in the cover crop residues or the soil will be available to the next crop. Purposeful cover crop planning means trying to predict and control these two factors. Therefore, C:N ratio is something worth considering for cover crop planners! C:N Ratio Technical Details To help you understand how C:N ratio influences the rate of cover crop residue decomposition, consider the following core concept: the soil microbes most responsible for fresh residue decomposition (mostly bacteria) have a C:N ratio of approximately 8:1, but their ideal food has a C:N ratio of approximately 24:1. These microorganisms will use about two thirds of the C they consume for energy. This means that for every 24 units of C consumed, about 16 units will be respired as CO2. The remaining eight units of C and one unit of N will be integrated into new microbial biomass. Remember: 24:1 makes ideal soil microbe food! Now consider the following three scenarios: Mid C:N Ratio Scenario Assume cover crop residues with an intermediate C:N ratio of 24:1 are returned to the soil. This would be similar to killing rye (grass functional group) in the vegetative stage (prior to seed head emergence). In this case, there would be neither an excess nor a shortage of N for microbial consumption of the residues. The residues would be broken down at a moderate pace and the soil would be protected for an intermediate period of time. Most of the N in the residues would be integrated into microbial biomass (then slowly cycled over time for future plant use). We would not expect a meaningful amount of N in the residues to be rapidly released all at once for use by the next crop, in the near term or long term. Low C:N Ratio Scenario (Mineralization) Assume cover crop residues with a C:N ratio of 12:1 (also known as 24:2) are returned to the soil. This would be similar to killing a hairy vetch cover crop (legume functional group) at mid bloom. These residues contain significantly more N than soil microbes need in order to digest it. The residues would be broken down quickly and protection of the soil surface provided by those residues would disappear rapidly. The extra N in the residues would be quickly released into the soil for use by the next crop. This net increase in available soil N is called N mineralization. The speed and amount of N mineralized in this situation would typically increase if the residues were tilled into the soil and if conditions were warm and moist. High C:N Ratio Scenario (Immobilization) Assume cover crop residues with C:N ratio of 48:1 (also known as 24:½) are returned to the soil. This would be similar to killing a rye cover crop in the grain fill stage. These residues contain significantly less N than soil microbes need to consume it. The residues would be broken down slowly and protection of the soil surface provided by those residues would be long-lasting. The microbes would take the additional N needed for digestion of these residues from the pool of available soil N. This would result in a net decrease in soil N availability and potential N deficiencies in grasses and other non-legume crops. This short-term net decrease in available soil N during microbial digestion of high-C:N-ratio residues is called N immobilization. The resulting N deficiencies in crops like corn will generally be more severe in cold soils and no-till conditions where supplemental N fertilizer has been spread over the top of high C:N ratio residues. C:N Ratio Planning Considerations Select target C:N ratio first, then select functional groups to achieve it Purposeful cover crop planning means thinking ahead about the quality (i.e., the C:N ratio) of the residues you want to return to the soil when the cover is terminated. Do you want a thick, long-lasting mulch of mature small grain with a high C:N ratio? Do you want low C:N ratio residues that will quickly release extra N for uptake by the next crop? Or do you want something in between? Estimate early in the planning process what cover crop C:N ratio you hope to see at termination. Functional group selection one of the single biggest factors controlling the final C:N ratio of your cover crop. Therefore use your target C:N ratio as the basis for selecting functional groups. Mix functional groups to moderate your C:N ratios Both very high and very low cover crop C:N ratios can be problematic. High C:N ratios in the range of 50:1 or greater can cause severe short-term soil N immobilization and N deficiencies in subsequent crops. Low C:N ratios in the range of 15:1 or less can lead to rapid mineralization of cover crop N. Although it originates from an organic source, this N can be quickly converted to soluble forms and potentially leached or lost almost as easily as fertilizer N. Mixing cover crop functional groups in a single cover crop planting can help moderate the C:N ratio of residues at termination. The result is residue that breaks down at an intermediate pace and does not cause N immobilization. A mix of rye and hairy vetch provides a classic example. An equal mix of headed-out rye with a C:N ratio of 48:1 and flowering hairy vetch with a C:N ratio of 12:1 produces material with an overall C:N ratio of 60:2, which is the same as 30:1 (neutral to very mild N immobilization) Watch for N immobilization behind grass cover crops! Be on the lookout for instances where an N-fertilized cash crop like corn will be planted behind a mature grass cover crop. This situation sends up a red flag due to the potential for N immobilization. For example, be very cautious about planting no-till corn into a mature, high-biomass rye cover crop. Note that planting a legume crop like soybeans into the same residue can work very well, since soybeans fix the own N from the air. Consider the following ideas for reducing the risk of N deficiencies to corn or another grass or N-fertilized cash crop following a grass cover crop: 1. Moderate the overall C:N ratio of the cover crop by including legumes or brassicas in the mix. 2. The C:N ratio of cover crop grasses increases quickly after stem elongation and the reproductive phase begins. Terminate the grass cover crop earlier to keep C:N ratios lower. 3. Consider not only the quality, but also the quantity of cover crop material. The more high-C:N material you have, the greater the amount and duration of potential soil N tie-up. If the amount of residue is low, immobilization may not be a major concern. 4. Consider weather and similar factors. The risk of N immobilization and associated crop deficiencies is higher in colder weather. 5. Provide supplemental early-season N and S fertilizer (or low C:N ratio manure) to help offset the effects of N immobilization. In a no-till situation, consider injecting those nutrients in a band below the residue. Functional Groups: Rotation & Diversity Considerations Alternate functional groups in rotations When planning crop rotations, a good rule of thumb is to alternate between crops from different functional groups. This applies to both harvested crops and non-harvested cover crops. For example, grass or brassica cash crops (corn, canola) will benefit from the N fixed and quickly released by a preceding legume cover crop. In turn, legume cash crops like soybeans often thrive when no-till planted into high-C:N-ratio small grain residues. Mix groups to increase cover crop functionality Mixing multiple cover crop functional groups in a single planting can do far more than simply help moderate the C:N ratios of residues. Well-planned mixes can produce a blend of functions (subsoiling from brassicas, pollinator habitat from legumes, etc.) that would be very difficult to achieve with monocultures. Understand limits & benefits of cover crops for soil pest management Rotating functional groups is not a soil pest cure-all It is tempting to assume that plants from different functional groups are not subject to the same pests, such as soil-borne fungal diseases and plant-parasitic nematodes. This would make crop rotation planning for control of soil pests very easy. Unfortunately, this is not a safe assumption. If a particular field has a known problem with a soil pest or pathogen affecting a particular cash crop, growers are often interested in finding a cover crop that are not a host to that pest or pathogen (or even better, that is actively antagonistic to it). In this instance, simply rotating to a different functional group is no guarantee. Finding the non-host or antagonistic cover crop usually comes down to species-specific or even variety-specific research. Use cover crops to help create pest-suppressive soils and systems, not to "kill" pests Following up on the previous point, here is a related rule of thumb for anyone thinking about cover crops as a tool for controlling soil pests: Use cover crops to help add diversity to rotations with soil pest problems; do not try to use cover crops in the "off-season" to eliminate pests in low-diversity cash crop systems. This concept is best explained with an example. Growers with long-term low-diversity rotations (e.g., continuous soybeans, continuous strawberries, etc.) tend to have problems with soil-borne pests and diseases that get worse over time. These growers are often eager to find cover crops that can be grown in the "off-season" (when their chosen cash crop is not in the ground) that will reduce the severity of the soil-borne pests. Unfortunately, these growers are not typically interested in modifying the key feature of the crop rotation that is the true cause of the problem – they want to continue growing the same narrow range of cash crop(s) every year. These growers are looking for a cover crop that will serve the same purpose as a pesticide – they want to selectively kill a pest. Although brassicas carefully managed for soil biofumigation might help, cover crops will probably not help meet this particular goal. A more promising approach in such cases is to recommend much more aggressive changes to the underlying crop rotation. The goal should be to rotate to non-host crops for multiple seasons or years and to restore diversity and balance to the below-ground soil ecosystem. Both cash crops and cover crops can help provide the aboveground diversity of plants that will restore soil health below ground. Part III. Cover Crop Seasonal Niches Introduction to Seasonal Niches A Core Concept for Cover Crop Planning In Maharashtra there are six distinct "seasonal niches" or appropriate periods across the calendar year for growing different types of cover crops. Understanding these seasonal niches is the next step in narrowing down your cover crop choices. Understanding seasonal niches is also crucial if you want to use this document effectively, because all of the cover crop recommendations and seeding rates, dates, and depths in the following pages are categorized by seasonal niche. Study "Seasonal Niche Calendar" Diagram One of the best ways to understand the seasonal niche concept is to study the "Cover Crop Seasonal Niche Calendar & Matrix of Recommended Species" diagram below. This information is formatted to fit on one side of a page so that it can be used as a handout or posted in a convenient location for easy reference. Use the calendar of seasonal niches diagram only for its intended purpose, which is to give you a general understanding of the six seasonal niches. Do not use it to select specific planting or termination dates for a particular cover crop species you intend to grow. Use the establishment specifications later in this document for that purpose. Winter Spring Summer Fall Winter Spring Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Niche 1: Fall Seed Winter Hardy Planting Period Termination Period Niche 2: Fall Seed Winter Kill Planting Period Termination Period Niche 3: Summer Seed Frost Kill Planting Period Termination Period Niche 4: Summer Seed Summer Kill Planting Period Termination Period Niche 5: Spring Seed Frost Hardy Planting Period Termination Period Niche 6: Biennial / Perennial Spring Planting Period Fall Planting Period (Termination Period varies) Niche Name Description Functional Groups &amp; Recommended Species Grass Broadleaf / Forb Legume 1. Fall Seed Winter Hardy Winterhardy cool-season annual planted in fall and terminated in spring. annual ryegrass; small grains (barley, oat, wheat, triticale, rye) rapeseed; forage turnip red clover; crimson clover; Austrian winter pea; woollypod vetch; hairy vetch 2. Fall Seed Winter Kill Fast-growing, frost-hardy annual seeded in early fall. Expected to freeze-kill mid-winter (at 15 to 20° F.) spring oat forage radish; mustard, phacelia Canadian spring pea 3. Summer Seed Frost Kill Frost-tender, warm-season annual planted in mid to late summer. Expected to winterkill at first frost. sorghum-sudangrass; pearl millet; foxtail millet buckwheat; black oil sunflower forage soybean; cowpea; sunnhemp 4. Summer Seed Summer Kill Frost-tender, warm-season annual seeded early summer. Terminated in time to plant back another crop in summer or fall. sorghum-sudangrass; pearl millet; foxtail millet buckwheat; black oil sunflower forage soybean; cowpea; sunnhemp 5. Spring Seed Frost Hardy Fast-growing, frost-hardy cool-season annual planted in late winter/early spring. spring oat; winter (or spring) small grains (barley, wheat, triticale, rye) forage radish; mustard; phacelia; rapeseed; forage turnip; Canadian spring pea; Austrian winter pea; woolypod vetch; hairy vetch 6. Biennial / Perennial Biennial or perennial, grown at least one summer, typically 18 months tall fescue; orchardgrass alfalfa; red clover; white clover; yellow blossom sweetclover Part IV. Cover Crop Species Lists & Establishment Specifications Introduction to Species Lists & Establishment Specifications In the following pages, you will find the following: 1. Lists and descriptions of recommended cover crop species for each of the six seasonal niches 2. Corresponding establishment specifications ("specs") that provide seeding rate, date, depth, and other information for each recommended species This key information is found in nine tables, which are formatted so they can be readily extracted from this document for use as handouts, etc. The species lists and establishment specs were designed to be used together. Consult both as you select cover crop species, then plan seeding details. In the following pages that precede the species lists and establishment specification tables, you will find definitions of terms, guidance on using the tables, and other considerations for planning good cover crops. Note that the establishment specifications provide seeding recommendations for traditional monocultures. Advice on formulating and setting seeding rates for cover crop mixes are found in the next chapter. How species lists are organized Within each species list and establishment specs table, species are first categorized by functional group. Within each functional group, species are then listed roughly in order of time of planting timing (i.e., earliest to be planted are listed first). For Latin names and some common aliases ("aka") for each species, see the species description tables. The lists of recommended species are designed to provide a range of choices, not an exhaustive list of every possible option. In some cases, related species can potentially be substituted for one of the listed cover crops (e.g., common vetch instead of woollypod vetch), as noted in the description of the species. If you are interested substituting a cover crop species that is not listed, contact NRCS State Resource Conservationist (SRC) staff. Winterkill Probability Whether or not a cover crop will winterkill is an important question only for fall-seeded crops in Niches 1 and 2 (all summer-seeded crops in Niches 3 and 4 will winterkill). Therefore, the column "Winterkill Probability" appears only in Establishment Specs A for fall-seeded species. Use the following guidance to help interpret the information provided in that column. Species with a high probability of winterkill fit into Seasonal Niche 2 (Fall Seed Winterkill). These are highlighted with gray shading. All other species in the Establishment Specs A table fall into Seasonal Niche 1 (Fall Seed Winter-Hardy). "Winterkill" in this case refers to cover crop termination by cold in mid-winter. It does not refer to cold damage caused by late spring freezes after the cover crop has broken dormancy, which can damage even very cold-hardy speices in some years. See Table 1 for interpretations of winterkill probability ratings (these definitions are specific to this document and may not be consistent with how the terms are used in other documents). **Table 1. Interpretation of Winterkill Probability Ratings from Establishment Specs A for Fall-Seeded Cover Crops** Rating Suggested Interpretation Very low: Reliably winterhardy throughout Maharashtra; typically survives temperatures below 0° F. Low: Reliably winterhardy in most of Maharashtra; winterkills in coldest regions of state in some years; may survive temperatures as low as 0° F.; variety selection may influence hardiness. Mid: Variable winter-hardiness across Maharashtra; likely to winterkill in colder regions, survive in warmer regions; may survive temperatures between 15° and 20° F.; variety selection may significantly influence hardiness and makes winterhardiness difficult to predict. High: Reliably winterkills in most of Maharashtra; overwinters in warmest regions of state in some years; not likely to survive temperatures between 15° and 20° F., variety selection may influence hardiness. Very high: Reliably winterkills throughout Maharashtra; typically does not survive temperatures below 28° F. The winterkill probability ratings assume the crop will be seeded in the preferred date range. Crops seeded outside the recommended planting window or depth may be more or less vulnerable to winter damage (see additional discussion of seeding date impact on winter-hardiness below). Disclaimer: The winterkill ratings provided are very general estimates. They may prove incorrect for some crops in some years, especially in the warmest and coldest regions of Maharashtra. For some species, winter-hardiness can vary significantly between cultivars. For additional information about winter-hardiness of individual species or varieties, consult the species lists, other references, and/or vendors and local experts. Seeding Rates Definitions and Interpretation of Terms in Establishment Specs Base or default rate vs. acceptable range of rates The "base / default" seeding rate is the recommended rate for achieving typical cover crop purposes for this species in this particular seasonal niche. Use the base rate as a starting point for planning or as a default – i.e., in the absence of more details about the situation or intended purpose, use the base rate. An "acceptable range" of seeding rates is also provided. Use rates in the acceptable range that are higher or lower than the base rate if the grower has a specific cover crop purpose or situation that is more likely to be achieved with that rate. For some less typical purposes, more or less than the base rate may be best. In some cases, the grower's primary cover crop purpose would be best achieved by planting the base rate, but cost or other factors cause him to seed a lower rate. In these instances, some cover crop benefits may still be gained by planting in the acceptable rate range, but the probability of achieving that key primary purpose may be reduced. For example, if the grower has signed up for a payment that requires achieving a minimum level of cover or biomass by a specific deadline, do not assume that any and all seeding rates in the acceptable range will achieve that goal. Drill vs. broadcast rates "Drill" rates are recommended seeding rates for planting with a typical conventional or no-till grain drill on 7.5-inch row spacing. "Bcast + incorp" rates are recommend seeding rates for broadcasting seed (by hand, with a spin spreader, or by airplane), then using a harrow, roller, or other operation to help ensure seed-to-soil contact. Broadcasting seed without any incorporation, especially when the soil is covered with residue, can work but is not recommended. For more on issue of broadcasting seed with or without incorporation, see the section on seeding depth below. Pros & Cons of Higher vs. Lower Seeding Rates Since the establishment specs offer ranges of acceptable seeding rates, some generalizations about the pros and cons of higher vs. lower rates are provided below. Consult species lists and other resources or experts for additional information on particular species. Higher seeding rates generally provide more soil coverage in a shorter time. For example, if the goal is maximum nutrient uptake and soil cover ahead of winter by a small grain crop, that purpose will be best met with relatively high seeding rates. Increasing seeding rates above the recommended base rate is especially useful when the primary cover crop purpose is weed control. Higher rates can also help with (but not solve) problems with suboptimal planting conditions, such as late seeding, soil crusting that interferes with seedling emergence, etc. Crowded plants may be taller and more vulnerable to lodging. When nutrients and water are limiting, closely packed plants may be stunted because due to excessive competition between plants. This could be an advantage for weed control or other purposes, or a major disadvantage in other situations. When the focus is on later-season benefits, standability, and larger individual plants, lower seeding rates may be beneficial. Here are two possible examples: 1. If the goal is small grain that stands well for wind erosion prevention next spring, lean towards lower seeding rates to minimize lodging potential. 2. Lower rates of forage radish will produce larger tubers (and presumably deeper roots) than high rates. Seeding Depth Deeper vs. Shallower Seeding Depths The establishment specs show a range of seeding depths for each species. In general, use the shallower end of the range when soil is moist, conditions are cool, or crusting may interfere with emergence. Use the deeper end of the range to place seeds into moist soil when conditions are warmer and drier. Broadcasting Seed without Incorporation: Not Recommended When seed is broadcast, a subsequent operation is recommended to help ensure seed-to-soil contact. Depending on the situation, the subsequent operation could be harrowing, raking, rolling or even irrigating. Incorporation is especially important when broadcasting seed over the top of heavy residues that block seed-to-soil contact. It should be noted that broadcast seeding cover crops into standing unharvested crops without incorporation has been successful for many Maharashtra growers. This method can work and sometimes can work very well. However, it is not as reliable as seeding methods that ensure more consistent seed-to-soil contact. Therefore, VA NRCS generally recommends drilling or otherwise incorporating all cover crop seed to the depths listed in the establishment specs. There are exceptions to every rule. One specific example is frost-seeding clover into pastures or small grains in late winter. This is a special practice where the combination of very small seed, exposed soil, and frost action can provide acceptable results. Seeding Dates Definitions and Interpretation of Terms in Establishment Specs Calendar dates vs. "relative-to-frost" seeding dates The establishment specs provide cover crop seeding date recommendations in two ways: 1. Traditional calendar date ranges are provided for each of three Maharashtra physiographic regions. 2. Seeding date ranges are also presented relative to average frost dates. The simplest approach for most users is to refer to the traditional calendar date ranges for seeding recommendations. Why are seeding dates relative to frost included? The seeding date recommendations in this document were developed by first selecting planting timeframes before or after average fall or spring frost dates. These relative date ranges were then used to derive the traditional calendar dates shown in the establishment specs. The relative-to-frost dates are listed in order to give you the option to customize seeding date recommendations for your local climate. To learn more about how to (a) gauge whether the traditional calendar date ranges listed are representative for your location and (b) customize seeding date recommendations to your local climate, see Appendix I. Preferred vs. possible seeding dates Whether you are looking at calendar or relative-to-frost dates in the establishment specs, you will see two sets of recommended date ranges. The "preferred" seeding date range is the best time to plant in order to achieve typical cover crop purposes for the specified species and seasonal niche. Use the preferred range as a starting point for planning or as a default – i.e., in the absence of more details and planning about the situation or intended purpose, use the preferred dates. The "possible" seeding date range offers a wider planting window. Use dates in the possible range that are earlier or later than the preferred date if the grower has a specific cover crop purpose or objective that is more likely to be achieved by planting outside the preferred window. For some less typical purposes, planting outside the preferred date range may be best. In some cases, the grower's primary cover crop purpose would be best achieved by planting in the preferred date range, but practical constraints (late harvest of preceding crop, etc.) prevent that from happening. In this case, some cover crop benefits may still be gained by planting in the possible date range, but the probability of achieving that key primary purpose may be significantly reduced. For example, if the grower has signed up for a program that requires achieving a minimum level of cover or biomass by a specific deadline, do not assume that any and all plantings in the possible date range will achieve that goal. Pros & Cons of Earlier vs. Later Seeding Since ranges of seeding dates are provided in the establishment specs, the following generalizations about earlier vs. later seeding dates are offered below as a starting point for planning. Consult species lists and other resources and experts for additional details for particular species and situations. For fall-seeded species (Niches 1 and 2), seeding earlier provides more overall sunlight energy before the onset of winter. Sunlight energy is usually, but not always, the most limiting factor for fall cover crop growth. For some species, achieving adequate development prior to the onset of winter is important for winter-hardiness. For example, rapeseed is less winter-hardy if it is late planted. But excessive growth in the fall can also make some species vulnerable to winterkill. If the goal is for the crop to overwinter, very lush fall growth may be a disadvantage for some species (e.g., Austrian Winter Peas grown in Seasonal Niche 1). If the grower's goal is for the cover to winterkill, lush growth can be an advantage (e.g., Canadian Spring Peas grown in Seasonal Niche 2). In general, if a fall-seeded cover crop’s core purpose is spring production of biomass, later seeding is less of a problem and can even be an advantage. For example, early-seeded small grains such as barley and wheat are vulnerable to Hessian fly damage. For this reason, small grain seeding for grain production is often purposely delayed in the fall until after the “fly-free date”. Planting in this later range (which falls into the “possible range” in Establishment Specs A) can be acceptable for small grain cover crops. But if the primary purpose is fall and winter N scavenging and maximum winter cover, then earlier planting is the priority and Hessian fly concerns are secondary. Delayed planting can be a core part of the cover cropping strategy for cover seeded in late summer for Niche 3. In this case, the goal may be to plant a summer crop like sorghum-sudangrass early enough to get good growth, but late enough that the crop will not set seed before frost kills it. Cover Crop Maturity & Termination Timing Purposeful cover crop planning usually requires more than selecting a seeding date. It also requires forecasting when the cover crop will reach one or more stages of maturity, which can be critical for planning the timing of termination. The species lists and establishment specs provide limited maturity information for some species and niches. This information is provided as a starting point for planning the timing of termination, mowing, or related activities. Depending on the species, maturity information is provided in terms of days after planting (DAP), calendar date ranges, or timing relative to other species. Disclaimer: Use this maturity information only as a general guideline. It may prove incorrect for some crops in some years, as maturity timing can be affected by a wide range of factors including variety, day length, weather, and crop condition. For additional information about maturity timing of individual species or varieties, consult other references and experts, including vendors. Timing of Cover Crop Maturity: Why It Matters Here are three examples of reasons why you should always consider maturity timing when planning covers: To ensure sufficient biomass production Some cover crop purposes are best achieved by maximizing biomass production. For example, if the farmer’s purpose is to capture atmospheric N with a legume cover and reduce fertilization of the subsequent crop, then ideal termination timing for the legume is typically early reproductive stage (mid-bloom). At this time, the cover has generally achieved both maximum biomass and maximum N fixation, but translocation of N from tissue to new seed has not yet started. To avoid too much biomass production. Some purposes are best achieved by stopping cover crop growth well ahead of maximum biomass. For example, if they are allowed to reach maximum biomass, grasses like rye or sorghum-sudangrass have the potential to produce large amounts of hard-to-manage, high C:N ratio residue than can be overwhelming for some growers. To stop seed set and future weed problems Many cover crops can produce large amounts of seed in a relatively short time. For example, buckwheat can produce viable seed in as little as 45 days. Self-seeded cover crops that volunteer in subsequent crops can be very competitive weeds. Cover Crop Maturity & Termination Timing: Checklist for Planning Growers should not be too intimidated by the potential problems with over-mature cover crops described above, as long as cover crop maturity and termination timing is considered ahead of time. Try to address each of these steps before the cover crop is in the ground: 1. Maturity timing is a much greater concern for some cover crops and situations than others. Know the characteristics of the species to be grown and cropping system context. 2. Try to predict the approximate stage of cover crop development that would be best for termination or other action, such as mowing, to set back biomass and/or seed production). 3. Have a general idea of the calendar date when the target termination or mowing stage is likely to be reached. This will always be just an approximation. 4. Have a plan to monitor cover crop development and know up front what growth stage indicator (e.g., height, heading, bloom, etc.) will be trigger for action. In-field monitoring can be crucial because the time it takes for the cover crop to reach its target growth stage can be influenced by site-specific factors such as weather, fertility, and variety. 5. Make sure the necessary personnel, equipment, etc. will be available to carry out termination or mowing when needed.